Chapter XII
Chapter XII
J O S H U A
CHAP. XII.
This chapter is a summary of Israel's conquests. I. Their conquests under Moses, on the
other side Jordan (for we now suppose ourselves in Canaan) eastward, which we had the
history of, Num. xxi. 24, &c. And here the abridgment of that history, ver. 1-6. II. Their
conquests under Joshua, on this side Jordan, westward. 1. The country they reduced, ver.
7, 8. 2. The kings they subdued, thirty-one in all, ver. 9-24. And this comes in here, not only
as a conclusion of the history of the wars of Canaan (that we might at one view see what
they had got), but as a preface to the history of the dividing of Canaan, that all that might
be put together which they were not to make a distribution of.
Summary of Israel's Conquests. (b. c. 1450.)
1 Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and possessed
their land on the other side Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto
mount Hermon, and all the plain on the east:   2 Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in
Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and from the
middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border
of the children of Ammon;   3 And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and
unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to Beth-jeshimoth; and from
the south, under Ashdoth-pisgah:   4 And the coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the
remnant of the giants, that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,   5 And reigned in mount Her-
mon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurites and the
Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.   6 Them did Moses
the servant of the Lord and the children of Israel smite: and Moses the servant of the Lord
gave it for a possession unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh.
Joshua, or whoever else is the historian before he comes to sum up the new conquests
Israel had made, in these verses receives their former conquests in Moses's time, under
whom they became masters of the great and potent kingdoms of Sihon and Og. Note, Fresh
mercies must not drown the remembrance of former mercies, nor must the glory of the
present instruments of good to the church be suffered to eclipse and diminish the just
honour of those who have gone before them, and who were the blessings and ornaments of
their day. Joshua's services and achievements are confessedly great, but let not those under
Moses be overlooked and forgotten, since God was the same who wrought both, and both
put together proclaim him the Alpha and Omega of Israel's great salvation. Here is, 1. A
description of this conquered country, the measure and bounds of it in general (v. 1): From
the river Arnon in the south, to Mount Hermon in the north. In particular, here is a descrip-
tion of the kingdom of Sihon (v. 2, 3), and that of Og, v. 4, 5. Moses had described this
country very particularly (Deut. ii. 36; iii. 4, &c.), and this description here agrees with his.
126
Chapter XII
King Og is said to dwell at Ashtaroth and Edrei (v. 4), probably because they were both his
royal cities; he had palaces in both, and resided sometimes in one and sometimes in the
other; one perhaps was his summer seat and the other his winter seat. But Israel took both
from him, and made one grave to serve him that could not be content with one palace. 2.
The distribution of this country. Moses assigned it to the two tribes and a half, at their request,
and divided it among them (v. 6), of which we had the story at large, Num. xxxii. The dividing
of it when it was conquered by Moses is here mentioned as an example to Joshua what he
must do now that he had conquered the country on this side Jordan. Moses, in his time,
gave to one part of Israel a very rich and fruitful country, but it was on the outside of Jordan;
but Joshua gave to all Israel the holy land, the mountain of God's sanctuary, within Jordan:
so the law conferred upon some few of God's spiritual Israel external temporal blessings,
which were earnests of good things to come; but our Lord Jesus, the true Joshua, has provided
for all the children of promise spiritual blessings—the privileges of the sanctuary, and the
heavenly Canaan. The triumphs and grants of the law were glorious, but those of the gospel
far exceed in glory.
7 And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the children of Israel smote
on this side Jordan on the west, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount
Halak, that goeth up to Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a possession ac-
cording to their divisions;   8 In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in
the springs, and in the wilderness, and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and
the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites:   9 The king of Jericho, one;
the king of Ai, which is beside Beth-el, one;   10 The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of
Hebron, one;   11 The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;   12 The king of Eglon,
one; the king of Gezer, one;   13 The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;   14 The
king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;   15 The king of Libnah, one; the king of
Adullam, one;   16 The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Beth-el, one;   17 The king of
Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;   18 The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon,
one;   19 The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;   20 The king of Shimron-meron,
one; the king of Achshaph, one;   21 The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;  
22 The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;   23 The king of Dor in
the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one;   24 The king of Tirzah, one: all
the kings thirty and one.
We have here a breviate of Joshua's conquests.
I. The limits of the country he conquered. It lay between Jordan on the east and the
Mediterranean Sea on the west, and extended from Baal-gad near Lebanon in the north to
Halak, which lay upon the country of Edom in the south, v. 7. The boundaries are more
largely described, Num. xxxiv. 2, &c. But what is here said is enough to show that God had
127
Chapter XII
been as good as his word, and had given them possession of all he had promised them by
Moses, if they would but have kept it.
II. The various kinds of land that were found in this country, which contributed both
to its pleasantness and to its fruitfulness, v. 8. There were mountains, not craggy, and rocky,
and barren, which are frightful to the traveller and useless to the inhabitants, but fruitful
hills, such as put forth precious things (Deut. xxxiii. 15), which charmed the spectator's eye
and filled the owner's hand. And valleys, not mossy and boggy, but covered with corn, Ps.
lxv. 13. There were plains, and springs to water them; and even in that rich land there were
wildernesses too, or forests, which were not so thickly inhabited as other parts, yet had towns
and houses in them, but served as foils to set off the more pleasant and fruitful countries.
III. The several nations that had been in possession of this country—Hittites, Amorites,
Canaanites, &c., all of them descended from Canaan, the accursed son of Ham, Gen. x.
15-18. Seven nations they are called (Deut. vii. 1), and so many are there reckoned up, but
here six only are mentioned, the Girgashites being either lost or left out, though we find
them, Gen. x. 16 and xv. 21. Either they were incorporated with some other of these nations,
or, as the tradition of the Jews is, upon the approach of Israel under Joshua they all withdrew
and went into Africa, leaving their country to be possessed by Israel, with whom they saw
it was to no purpose to contend, and therefore they are not named among the nations that
Joshua subdued.
IV. A list of the kings that were conquered and subdued by the sword of Israel, some
in the field, others in their own cities, thirty-one in all, and very particularly named and
counted, it should seem, in the order in which they were conquered; for the catalogue begins
with the kings of Jericho and Ai, then takes in the king of Jerusalem and the princes of the
south that were in confederacy with him, and then proceeds to those of the northern asso-
ciation. Now, 1. This shows what a very fruitful country Canaan then was, which could
support so many kingdoms, and in which so many kings chose to throng together rather
than disperse themselves into other countries, which we may suppose not yet inhabited, but
where, though they might find more room, they could not expect such plenty and pleasure:
this was the land God spied out for Israel; and yet at this day it is one of the most barren,
despicable, and unprofitable countries in the world: such is the effect of the curse it lies under,
since its possessors rejected Christ and his gospel, as was foretold by Moses, Deut. xxix. 23.
2. It shows what narrow limits men's ambition was then confined to. These kings contented
themselves with the government, each of them, of one city and the towns and villages that
pertained to it; and no one of them, for aught that appears, aimed to make himself master
of the rest, but, when there was occasion, all united for the common safety. Yet it should
seem that what was wanting in the extent of their territories was made up in the absoluteness
of their power, their subjects being all their tenants and vassals, and entirely at their com-
mand. 3. It shows how good God was to Israel, in giving them victory over all these kings,
128
Chapter XII
and possession of all these kingdoms, and what obligations he hereby laid upon them to
observe his statutes and to keep his laws, Ps. cv. 44, 45. Here were thirty-one kingdoms, or
seigniories, to be divided among nine tribes and a half of Israel. Of these there fell to the lot
of Judah the kingdoms of Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, Eglon, Debir, Arad, Libnah, and
Adullam, eight in all, besides part of the kingdom of Jerusalem and part of Geder. Benjamin
had the kingdoms of Jericho, Ai, Jerusalem, Makkedah, Beth-el, and the nations of Gilgal,
six in all. Simeon had the kingdom of Hormah and part of Geder. Ephraim had the kingdoms
of Gezer and Tirzah. Manasseh (that half-tribe) had the kingdoms of Tappuah and Hepher,
Taanach and Megiddo. Asher had the kingdoms of Aphek and Achshaph. Zebulun had the
kingdoms of Lasharon, Shimron-meron, and Jokneam. Naphtali had the kingdoms of
Madon, Hazor, and Kedesh. And Issachar had that of Dor. These were some of the great
and famous kings that God smote, for his mercy endureth for ever; and gave their land for a
heritage, even a heritage unto Israel his servant, for his mercy endureth for ever, Ps. cxxxvi.
17, &c.
129
