Chapter VII
Chapter VII
J O S H U A
CHAP. VII.
More than once we have found the affairs of Israel, even when they were in the happiest
posture and gave the most hopeful prospects, perplexed and embarrassed by sin, and a stop
thereby put to the most promising proceedings. The golden calf, the murmuring at Kadesh,
and the iniquity of Peor, had broken their measures and given them great disturbance; and
in this chapter we have such another instance of the interruption given to the progress of
their arms by sin. But it being only the sin of one person or family, and soon expiated, the
consequences were not so mischievous as of those other sins; however it served to let them
know that they were still upon their good behaviour. We have here, I. The sin of Achan in
meddling with the accursed thing, ver. 1. II. The defeat of Israel before Ai thereupon, ver.
2-5. III. Joshua's humiliation and prayer on occasion of that sad disaster, ver. 6-9. IV. The
directions God gave him for the putting away of the guilt which had provoked God thus to
contend with them, ver. 10-15. V. The discovery, trial, conviction, condemnation, and exe-
cution, of the criminal, by which the anger of God was turned away, ver. 16-26. And by this
story it appears that, as the laws, so Canaan itself, "made nothing perfect," the perfection
both of holiness and peace to God's Israel is to be expected in the heavenly Canaan only.
The Sin of Achan. (b. c. 1451.)
1 But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing: for Achan, the
son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed
thing: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel.   2 And Joshua
sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Beth-aven, on the east side of Beth-el, and
spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men went up and viewed
Ai.   3 And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the people go up; but let
about two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai; and make not all the people to labour
thither; for they are but few.   4 So there went up thither of the people about three thousand
men: and they fled before the men of Ai.   5 And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty
and six men: for they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote
them in the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water.
The story of this chapter begins with a but. The Lord was with Joshua, and his fame was
noised through all that country, so the foregoing chapter ends, and it left no room to doubt
but that he would go on as he had begun conquering and to conquer. He did right, and ob-
served his orders in every thing. But the children of Israel committed a trespass, and so set
God against them; and then even Joshua's name and fame, his wisdom and courage, could
do them no service. If we lose our God, we lose our friends, who cannot help us unless God
be for us. Now here is,
68
Chapter VII
I. Achan sinning, v. 1. Here is only a general mention made of the sin; we shall afterwards
have a more particular account of it from his own mouth. The sin is here said to be taking
of the accursed thing, in disobedience to the command and in defiance of the threatening,
ch. vi. 18. In the sacking of Jericho orders were given that they should neither spare any lives
nor take any treasure to themselves; we read not of the breach of the former prohibition
(there were none to whom they showed any mercy), but of the latter: compassion was put
off and yielded to the law, but covetousness was indulged. The love of the world is that root
of bitterness which of all others is most hardly rooted up. Yet the history of Achan is a plain
intimation that he of all the thousands of Israel was the only delinquent in this matter. Had
there been more in like manner guilty, no doubt we should have heard of it: and it is strange
there were no more. The temptation was strong. It was easy to suggest what a pity it was
that so many things of value should be burnt; to what purpose is this waste? In plundering
cities, every man reckons himself entitled to what he can lay his hands on. It was easy to
promise themselves secrecy and impunity. Yet by the grace of God such impressions were
made upon the minds of the Israelites by the ordinances of God, circumcision and the pas-
sover, which they had lately been partakers of, and by the providences of God which had
been concerning them, that they stood in awe of the divine precept and judgment, and
generously denied themselves in obedience to their God. And yet, though it was a single
person that sinned, the children of Israel are said to commit the trespass, because one of their
body did it, and he was not as yet separated from them, nor disowned by them. They did it,
that is, by what Achan did guilt was brought upon the whole society of which he was a
member. This should be a warning to us to take heed of sin ourselves, lest by it many be
defiled or disquieted (Heb. xii. 15), and to take heed of having fellowship with sinners, and
of being in league with them, lest we share in their guilt. Many a careful tradesman has been
broken by a careless partner. And it concerns us to watch over one another for the preventing
of sin, because others' sins may redound to our damage.
II. The camp of Israel suffering for the same: The anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel; he saw the offence, though they did not, and takes a course to make them see it; for
one way or other, sooner or later, secret sins will be brought to light; and, if men enquire
not after them, God will, and with his enquiries will awaken theirs. Many a community is
under guilt and wrath and is not aware of it till the fire breaks out: here it broke out quickly.
1. Joshua sends a detachment to seize upon the next city that was in their way, and that was
Ai. Only 3000 men were sent, advice being brought him by his spies that the place was in-
considerable, and needed no greater force for the reduction of it, v. 2, 3. Now perhaps it was
a culpable assurance, or security rather that led them to send so small a party on this exped-
ition; it might also be an indulgence of the people in the love of ease, for they will not have
all the people to labour thither. Perhaps the people were the less forward to go upon this
expedition because they were denied the plunder of Jericho; and these spies were willing
69
Chapter VII
they should be gratified. Whereas when the town was to be taken, though God by his own
power would throw down the walls, yet they must all labour thither and labour there too,
in walking round it. It did not bode well at all that God's Israel began to think much of their
labour, and contrived how to spare their pains. It is required that we work out our salvation,
though it is God that works in us. It has likewise often proved of bad consequence to make
too light of an enemy. They are but few (say the spies), but, as few as they were, they were
too many for them. It will awaken our care and diligence in our Christian warfare to consider
that we wrestle with principalities and powers. 2. The party he sent, in their first attack upon
the town, were repulsed with some loss (v. 4, 5): They fled before the men of Ai, finding
themselves unaccountably dispirited, and their enemies to sally out upon them with more
vigour and resolution than they expected. In their retreat they had about thirty-six men cut
off: no great loss indeed out of such a number, but a dreadful surprise to those who had no
reason to expect any other in any attack than clear, cheap, and certain victory. And now, as
it proves, it is well there were but 3000 that fell under this disgrace. Had the body of the
army been there, they would have been no more able to keep their ground, now they were
under guilt and wrath, than this small party, and to them the defeat would have been much
more grievous and dishonourable. However, it was bad enough as it was, and served, (1.)
To humble God's Israel, and to teach them always to rejoice with trembling. Let not him that
girdeth on the harness boast as he that putteth it off. (2.) To harden the Canaanites, and to
make them the more secure notwithstanding the terrors they had been struck with, that
their ruin, when it came, might be the more dreadful. (3.) To be an evidence of God's dis-
pleasure against Israel, and a call to them to purge out the old leaven. And this was principally
intended in their defeat. 3. The retreat of this party in disorder put the whole camp of Israel
into a fright: The hearts of the people melted, not so much for the loss as for the disappoint-
ment. Joshua had assured them that the living God would without fail drive out the
Canaanites from before them, ch. iii. 10. How can this event be reconciled to that promise?
To every thinking man among them it appeared an indication of God's displeasure, and an
omen of something worse, and therefore no marvel it put them into such a consternation;
if God turn to be their enemy and fight against them, what will become of them? True Israelites
tremble when God is angry.
6 And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the
Lord until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.   7 And
Joshua said, Alas, O Lord God, wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over Jordan,
to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had been content,
and dwelt on the other side Jordan!   8 O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their
backs before their enemies!   9 For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall
hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt
thou do unto thy great name?
70
Chapter VII
We have here an account of the deep concern Joshua was in upon this sad occasion.
He, as a public person, interested himself more than any other in this public loss, and is
therein an example to princes and great men, and teaches them to lay much to heart the
calamities that befal their people: he is also a type of Christ, to whom the blood of his subjects
is precious, Ps. lxxii. 14. Observe,
I. How he grieved: He rent his clothes (v. 6), in token of great sorrow for this public
disaster, and especially a dread of God's displeasure, which was certainly the cause of it. Had
it been but the common chance of war (as we are too apt to express it), it would not have
become a general to droop thus under it; but, when God was angry, it was his duty and
honour to feel thus. One of the bravest soldiers that ever was owned that his flesh trembled
for fear of God, Ps. cxix. 120. As one humbling himself under the mighty had of God, he fell
to the earth upon his face, not thinking it any disparagement to him to lie thus low before
the great God, to whom he directed this token of reverence, by keeping his eye towards the
ark of the Lord. The elders of Israel, being interested in the cause and influenced by his ex-
ample, prostrated themselves with him, and, in token of deep humiliation, put dust upon
their heads, not only as mourners, but as penitents; not doubting but it was for some sin or
other that God did thus contend with them (though they knew not what it was), they humbled
themselves before God, and thus deprecated the progress of his wrath. This they continued
until even-tide, to show that it was not the result of a sudden feeling, but proceeded from a
deep conviction of their misery and danger if God were any way provoked to depart from
them. Joshua did not fall foul upon his spies for their misinformation concerning the strength
of the enemy, nor upon the soldiers for their cowardice, though perhaps both were blame-
worthy, but his eye is up to God; for is there any evil in the camp and he has not done it? His
eye is upon God as displeased, and that troubles him.
II. How he prayed, or pleaded rather, humbly expostulating the case with God, not
sullen, as David when the Lord had made a breach upon Uzzah, but much affected; his
spirit seemed to be somewhat ruffled and discomposed, yet not so as to be put out of frame
for prayer; but, by giving vent to his trouble in a humble address to God, he keeps his temper
and it ends well. 1. Now he wishes they had all taken up with the lot of the two tribes on the
other side Jordan, v. 7. He thinks it would have been better to have staid there and been cut
short than come hither to be cut off. This savours too much of discontent and distrust of
God, and cannot be justified, though the surprise and disappointment to one deeply con-
cerned for the public interest may in part excuse it. Those words, wherefore hast thou brought
us over Jordan to destroy us? are too like what the murmurers often said (Exod. xiv. 11, 12;
xvi. 3; xvii. 3; Num. xiv. 2, 3); but he that searches the heart knew they came from another
spirit, and therefore was not extreme to mark what he said amiss. Had Joshua considered
that this disorder which their affairs were put into no doubt proceeded from something
amiss, which yet might easily be redressed, and all set to rights again (as often in his prede-
71
Chapter VII
cessor's time), he would not have spoken of it as a thing taken for granted that they were
delivered into the hands of the Amorites to be destroyed. God knows what he does, though
we do not; but this we may be sure of, he never did nor ever will do us any wrong. 2. He
speaks as one quite at a loss concerning the meaning of this event (v. 8): "What shall I say,
what construction can I put upon it, when Israel, thy own people, for whom thou hast lately
done such great things and to whom thou hast promised the full possession of this land,
when they turn their backs before their enemies" (their necks, so the word is), "when they not
only flee before them, but fall before them, and become a prey to them? What shall we think
of the divine power? Is the Lord's arm shortened? Of the divine promise? Is his word yea
and nay? Of what God has done for us? Shall this be all undone again and prove in vain?"
Note, The methods of Providence are often intricate and perplexing, and such as the wisest
and best of men know not what to say to; but they shall know hereafter, John xiii. 7. 3. He
pleads the danger Israel was now in of being ruined. He gives up all for lost: "The Canaanites
will environ us round, concluding that now our defence having departed, and the scales being
turned in their favour, we shall soon be as contemptible as ever we were formidable, and
they will cut off our name from the earth," v. 9. Thus even good men, when things go against
them a little, are too apt to fear the worst, and make harder conclusions than there is reason
for. But his comes in here as a plea: "Lord, let not Israel's name, which has been so dear to
thee and so great in the world, be cut off." 4. He pleads the reproach that would be cast on
God, and that if Israel were ruined his glory would suffer by it. They will cut off our name,
says he, yet, as if he had corrected himself for insisting upon that, it is no great matter (thinks
he) what becomes of our little name (the cutting off of that will be a small loss), but what
wilt thou do for thy great name? this he looks upon and laments as the great aggravation of
the calamity. He feared it would reflect on God, his wisdom and power, his goodness and
faithfulness; what would the Egyptians say? Note, Nothing is more grievous to a gracious
soul than dishonour done to God's name. This also he insists upon as a plea for the preventing
of his fears and for a return of God's favour; it is the only word in all his address that has
any encouragement in it, and he concludes with it, leaving it to this issue, Father, glorify thy
name. The name of God is a great name, above every name; and, whatever happens, we
ought to believe that he will, and pray that he would, work for his own name, that this may
not be polluted. This should be our concern more than any thing else. On this we must fix
our eye as the end of all our desires, and from this we must fetch our encouragement as the
foundation of all our hopes. We cannot urge a better plea than this, Lord, What wilt thou
do for thy great name? Let God in all be glorified, and then welcome his whole will.
10 And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?
  11 Israel hath sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded
them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled
also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.   12 Therefore the children of Israel
72
Chapter VII
could not stand before their enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because
they were accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from
among you.   13 Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow: for
thus saith the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel:
thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among
you.   14 In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your tribes: and it shall
be, that the tribe which the Lord taketh shall come according to the families thereof; and
the family which the Lord shall take shall come by households; and the household which
the Lord shall take shall come man by man.   15 And it shall be, that he that is taken with
the accursed thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath trans-
gressed the covenant of the Lord, and because he hath wrought folly in Israel.
We have here God's answer to Joshua's address, which, we may suppose, came from the
oracle over the ark, before which Joshua had prostrated himself, v. 6. Those that desire to
know the will of God must attend with their desires upon the lively oracles, and wait at
wisdom's gates for wisdom's dictates, Prov. viii. 34. And let those that find themselves under
the tokens of God's displeasure never complain of him, but complain to him, and they shall
receive an answer of peace. The answer came immediately, while he was yet speaking (Isa.
lxv. 24), as that to Daniel, Dan. ix. 20, &c.
I. God encourages Joshua against his present despondencies, and the black and melan-
choly apprehensions he had of the present posture of Israel's affairs (v. 10): "Get thee up,
suffer not thy spirits to droop and sink thus; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?" No
doubt Joshua did well to humble himself before God, and mourn as he did, under the tokens
of his displeasure; but now God told him it was enough, he would not have him continue
any longer in that melancholy posture, for God delights not in the grief of penitents when
they afflict their souls further than as it qualifies them for pardon and peace; the days even
of that mourning must be ended. Arise, shake thyself from the dust, Isa. liii. 2. Joshua contin-
ued his mourning till eventide (v. 6), so late that they could do nothing that night towards
the discovery of the criminal, but were forced to put it off till next morning. Daniel (Dan.
ix. 21), and Ezra (Ezra ix. 5, 6), continued their mourning only till the time of the evening
sacrifice; that revived them both: but Joshua went past that time, and therefore is thus roused:
"Get thee up, do not lie all night there." Yet we find that Moses fell down before the Lord
forty days and forty nights, to make intercession for Israel, Deut. ix. 18. Joshua must get up
because he has other work to do than to lie there; the accursed thing must be discovered
and cast out, and the sooner the better; Joshua is the man that must do it, and therefore it
is time for him to lay aside his mourning weeds, and put on his judge's robes, and clothe
himself with zeal as a cloak. Weeping must not hinder sowing, nor one duty of religion jostle
out another. Every thing is beautiful in its season. Shechaniah perhaps had an eye to this in
what he said to Ezra upon a like occasion. See Ezra x. 2-4.
73
Chapter VII
II. He informs him of the true and only cause of this disaster, and shows him wherefore
he contended with them (v. 11): Israel hath sinned. "Think not that God's mind is changed,
his arm shortened, or his promise about to fail; no, it is sin, it is sin, that great mischief-
maker, that has stopped the current of divine favours and has made this breach upon you."
The sinner is not named, though the sin is described, but it is spoken of as the act of Israel
in general, till they have fastened it upon the particular person, and their godly sorrow have
so wrought a clearing of themselves, as theirs did, 2 Cor. vii. 11. Observe how the sin is here
made to appear exceedingly sinful. 1. They have transgressed my covenant, an express precept
with a penalty annexed to it. It was agreed that God should have all the spoil of Jericho, and
they should have the spoil of the rest of the cities of Canaan; but, in robbing God of his part,
they transgressed this covenant. 2. They have even taken of the devoted thing, in contempt
of the curse which was so solemnly denounced against him that should dare to break in
upon God's property, as if that curse had nothing in it formidable. 3. They have also stolen;
they did it clandestinely, as if they could conceal it from the divine omniscience, and they
were ready to say, The Lord shall not see, or will not miss so small a matter out of so great
a spoil. Thus thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thyself. 4. They have dissembled
also. Probably, when the action was over, Joshua called all the tribes, and asked them
whether they had faithfully disposed of the spoil according to the divine command, and
charged them, if they knew of any transgression, that they should discover it, but Achan
joined with the rest in a general protestation of innocency, and kept his countenance, like
the adulterous woman that eats and wipes her mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness.
Nay, 5. They have put the accursed thing among their own goods, as if they had as good a
title to that as to any thing they have, never expecting to be called to an account, nor
designing to make restitution. All this Joshua, though a wise and vigilant ruler, knew nothing
of, till God told him, who knows all the secret wickedness that is in the world, which men
know nothing of. God could at this time have told him who the person was that had done
this thing, but he does not, (1.) To exercise the zeal of Joshua and Israel, in searching out
the criminal. (2.) To give the sinner himself space to repent and make confession. Joshua
no doubt proclaimed it immediately throughout the camp that there was such a transgression
committed, upon which, if Achan had surrendered himself, and penitently owned his guilt,
and prevented the scrutiny, who knows but he might have had the benefit of that law which
accepted of a trespass-offering, with restitution, from those that had sinned through ignorance
in the holy things of the law? Lev. v. 15, 16. But Achan never discovering himself till the lot
discovered him evidenced the hardness of his heart, and therefore he found no mercy.
III. He awakens him to enquire further into it, by telling him, 1. That this was the only
ground for the controversy God had with them, this, and nothing else; so that when this
accursed thing was put away he needed not fear, all would be well, the stream of their suc-
cesses, when this one obstruction was removed, would run as strong as ever. 2. That if this
74
Chapter VII
accursed thing were not destroyed they could not expect the return of God's gracious pres-
ence; in plain terms, neither will I be with you any more as I have been, except you destroy
the accursed, that is, the accursed person, who is made so by the accursed thing. That which
is accursed will be destroyed; and those whom God has entrusted to bear the sword bear it
in vain if they make it not a terror to that wickedness which brings these judgments of God
on a land. By personal repentance and reformation, we destroy the accursed thing in our
own hearts, and, unless we do this, we must never expect the favour of the blessed God. Let
all men know that it is nothing but sin that separates between them and God, and, if it be
not sincerely repented of and forsaken, it will separate eternally.
IV. He directs him in what method to make this enquiry and prosecution. 1. He must
sanctify the people, now over-night, that is, as it is explained, he must command them to
sanctify themselves, v. 13. And what can either magistrates or ministers do more towards
sanctification? They must put themselves into a suitable frame to appear before God and
submit to the divine scrutiny, must examine themselves, now that God was coming to ex-
amine them, must prepare to meet their God. They were called to sanctify themselves when
they were to receive the divine law (Exod. xix.), and now also when they were to come under
the divine judgment; for in both God is to be attended with the utmost reverence. "There is
an accursed thing in the midst of you, and therefore sanctify yourselves," that is, Let all that
are innocent be able to clear themselves, and be the more careful to cleanse themselves. The
sin of others may be improved by us as furtherances of our sanctification, as the scandal of
the incestuous Corinthian occasioned a blessed reformation in that church, 2 Cor. vii. 11.
2. He must bring them all under the scrutiny of the lot (v. 14); the tribe which the guilty
person was of should first be discovered by lot, then the family, then the household, and
last of all the person. The conviction came upon him thus gradually that he might have some
space given him to come in and surrender himself; for God is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. Observe, The Lord is said to take the tribe,
and family, and household, on which the lot fell, because the disposal of the lot is of the Lord,
and, however casual it seems, is under the direction of infinite wisdom and justice; and to
show that when the sin of sinners finds them out God is to be acknowledged in it; it is he
that seizes them, and the arrests are in his name. God hath found out the iniquity of thy ser-
vants, Gen. xliv. 16. It is also intimated with what a certain and unerring judgment the
righteous God does and will distinguish between the innocent and the guilty, so that though
for a time they seem involved in the same condemnation, as the whole tribe did when it was
first taken by the lot, yet he who has his fan in his hand will effectually provide for the taking
out of the precious from the vile; so that though the righteous be of the same tribe, and family,
and household, with the wicked, yet they shall never be treated as the wicked, Gen. xviii. 25.
3. When the criminal was found out he must be put to death without mercy (Heb. x. 28),
and with all the expressions of a holy detestation, v. 15. He and all that he has must be burnt
75
Chapter VII
with fire, that there might be no remainders of the accursed thing among them; and the
reason given for this severe sentence is because the criminal has, (1.) Given a great affront
to God: He has transgressed the covenant of the Lord, who is jealous particularly for the
honour of the holy covenant. (2.) He has done a great injury to the church of God: He has
wrought folly in Israel, has shamed that nation which is looked upon by all its neighbours
to be a wise and understanding people, has infected that nation which is sanctified to God,
and troubled that nation of which he is the protector. These being crimes so heinous in their
nature, and of such pernicious consequence and example, the execution, which otherwise
would have come under the imputation of cruelty, is to be applauded as a piece of necessary
justice. It was sacrilege; it was invading God's rights, alienating his property, and converting
to a private use that which was devoted to his glory and appropriated to the service of his
sanctuary—this was the crime to be thus severely punished, for warning to all people in all
ages to take heed how they rob God.
Achan's Arraignment; Achan's Confession; The Execution of Achan. (b. c. 1451.)
16 So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their tribes; and the
tribe of Judah was taken:   17 And he brought the family of Judah; and he took the family
of the Zarhites: and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:
  18 And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of
Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.   19 And Joshua said unto Achan,
My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him;
and tell me now what thou hast done; hide it not from me.   20 And Achan answered Joshua,
and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done:
  21 When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them;
and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.   22
So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his tent,
and the silver under it.   23 And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought
them unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out before the Lord.  
24 And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the
garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses,
and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
Achor.   25 And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this
day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned
them with stones.   26 And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the
Lord turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called,
The valley of Achor, unto this day.
We have in these verses,
76
Chapter VII
I. The discovery of Achan by the lot, which proved a perfect lot, though it proceeded
gradually. Though we may suppose that Joshua slept the better, and with more ease and
satisfaction, when he knew the worst of the disease of that body of which, under God, he
was the head, and was put into a certain method of cure, yet he rose up early in the morning
(v. 16), so much was his heart upon it, to put away the accursed thing. We have found Joshua
upon other occasions an early riser; here it shows his zeal and vehement desire to see Israel
restored to the divine favour. In the scrutiny observe, 1. That the guilty tribe was that of
Judah, which was, and was to be, of all the tribes, the most honourable and illustrious; this
was an alloy to their dignity, and might serve as a check to their pride: many there were who
were its glories, but here was one that was its reproach. Let not the best families think it
strange if there be those found in them, and descending from them, that prove their grief
and shame. Judah was to have the first and largest lot in Canaan; the more inexcusable is
one of that tribe it, not content to wait for his own share, he break in upon God's property.
The Jews' tradition is that when the tribe of Judah was taken the valiant men of that tribe
drew their swords, and professed they would not sheathe them again till they saw the crim-
inal punished and themselves cleared who knew their own innocency. 2. That the guilty
person was at length fastened upon, and the language of the lot was, Thou art the man, v.
18. It was strange that Achan, being conscious to himself of guilt, when he saw the lot come
nearer and nearer to him, had not either the wit to make an escape or the grace to make a
confession; but his heart was hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and it proved to be
to his own destruction. We may well imagine how his countenance changed, and what horror
and confusion seized him when he was singled out as the delinquent, when the eyes of all
Israel were fastened upon him, and every one was ready to say, Have we found thee, O our
enemy? See here, (1.) The folly of those that promise themselves secrecy in sin: the righteous
God has many ways of bringing to light the hidden works of darkness, and so bringing to
shame and ruin those that continue their fellowship with those unfruitful works. A bird of
the air, when God pleases, shall carry the voice, Eccl. x. 20. See Ps. xciv. 7, &c. (2.) How much
it is our concern, when God is contending with us, to find out what the cause of action is,
what the particular sin is, that, like Achan, troubles our camp. We must thus examine
ourselves and carefully review the records of conscience, that we may find out the accursed
thing, and pray earnestly with holy Job, Lord, show me wherefore thou contendest with me.
Discover the traitor and he shall be no longer harboured.
II. His arraignment and examination, v. 19. Joshua sits judge, and, though abundantly
satisfied of his guilt by the determination of the lot, yet urges him to make a penitent con-
fession, that his soul might be saved by it in the other world, though he could not give him
any encouragement to hope that he should save his life by it. Observe, 1. How he accosts
him with the greatest mildness and tenderness that could be, like a true disciple of Moses.
He might justly have called him "thief," and "rebel," "Raca," and "thou fool," but he call him
77
Chapter VII
"son;" he might have adjured him to confess, as the high priest did our blessed Saviour, or
threatened him with the torture to extort a confession, but for love's sake he rather beseeches
him: I pray thee make confession. This is an example to all not to insult over those that are
in misery, though they have brought themselves into it by their own wickedness, but to treat
even offenders with the spirit of meekness, not knowing, what we ourselves should have
been and done if God had put us into the hands of our own counsels. It is likewise an example
to magistrates, in executing justice, to govern their own passions with a strict and prudent
hand, and never suffer themselves to be transported by them into any indecencies of beha-
viour or language, no, not towards those that have given the greatest provocations. The
wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God. Let them remember the judgment is
God's, who is Lord of his anger. This is the likeliest method of bringing offenders to repent-
ance. 2. What he wishes him to do, to confess the fact, to confess it to God, the party offended
by the crime; Joshua was to him in god's stead, so that in confessing to him he confessed to
God. Hereby he would satisfy Joshua and the congregation concerning that which was laid
to his charge; his confession would also be an evidence of his repentance, and a warning to
others to take heed of sinning after the similitude of his transgression: but that which Joshua
aims at herein is that God might be honoured by it, as the Lord, the God of infinite knowledge
and power, from whom no secrets are hid; and as the God of Israel, who, as he does partic-
ularly resent affronts given to his Israel, so he does the affronts given him by Israel. Note,
In confessing sin, as we take shame to ourselves, so we give glory to God as righteous God,
owning him justly displeased with us, and as a good God, who will not improve our confes-
sions as evidences against us, but is faithful and just to forgive when we are brought to own
that he would be faithful and just if he should punish. By sin we have injured God in his
honour. Christ by his death has made satisfaction for the injury; but it is required that we
by repentance show our good will to his honour, and, as far as in us lies, give glory to him.
Bishop Patrick quotes the Samaritan chronicle, making Joshua to say here to Achan, Lift up
thy eyes to the king of heaven and earth, and acknowledge that nothing can be hidden from
him who knoweth the greatest secrets.
III. His confession, which now at last, when he saw it was to no purpose to conceal his
crime, was free and ingenuous enough, v. 20, 21. Here is, 1. A penitent acknowledgment of
fault. "Indeed I have sinned; what I am charged with is too true to be denied and too bad to
be excused. I own it, I lament it; the Lord is righteous in bringing it to light, for indeed I
have sinned." This is the language of a penitent that is sick of his sin, and whose conscience
is loaded with it. "I have nothing to accuse any one else of, but a great deal to say against
myself; it is with me that the accursed thing is found; I am the man who has perverted that
which was right and it profited me not." And that wherewith he aggravates the sin is that it
was committed against the Lord God of Israel. He was himself an Israelite, a sharer with the
rest of that exalted nation in their privileges, so that, in offending the God of Israel, he offen-
78
Chapter VII
ded his own God, which laid him under the guilt of the basest treachery and ingratitude
imaginable. 2. A particular narrative of the fact: Thus and thus have I done. God had told
Joshua in general that a part of the devoted things was alienated, but is to him to draw from
Achan an account of the particulars; for, one way or other, God will make sinners' own
tongues to fall upon them (Ps. lxiv. 8); if ever he bring them to repentance, they will be their
own accusers, and their awakened consciences will be instead of a thousand witnesses. Note,
It becomes penitents, in the confession of their sins to God, to be very particular; not only,
"I have sinned," but, "In this and that instance I have sinned," reflecting with regret upon
all the steps that led to the sin and all the circumstances that aggravated it and made it ex-
ceedingly sinful: thus and thus have I done. He confesses, (1.) To the things taken. In plun-
dering a house in Jericho he found a goodly Babylonish garment; the word signifies a robe,
such as princes wore when they appeared in state, probably it belonged to the King of Jericho;
it was far fetched, as we translate it, from Babylon. A garment of divers colours, so some
render it. Whatever it was, in his eyes it made a very glorious show. "A thousand pities"
(thinks Achan) "that it should be burnt; then it will do nobody any good; if I take it for
myself, it will serve me many a year for my best garment." Under these pretences, he makes
bold with this first, and things it no harm to save it from the fire; but, his hand being thus
in, he proceeds to take a bag of money, two hundred shekels, that is one hundred ounces of
silver, and a wedge of gold which weighed fifty shekels, that is twenty-five ounces. He could
not plead that, in taking these, he saved them from the fire (for the silver and gold were to
be laid up in the treasury); but those that make a slight excuse to serve in daring to commit
one sin will have their hearts so hardened by it that they will venture upon the next without
such an excuse; for the way of sin is downhill. See what a peer prize it was for which Achan
ran this desperate hazard, and what an unspeakable loser he was by the bargain. See Matt.
xvi. 26. (2.) He confesses the manner of taking them. [1.] The sin began in the eye. He saw
these fine things, as Eve saw the forbidden fruit, and was strangely charmed with the sight.
See what comes of suffering the heart to walk after the eyes, and what need we have to make
this covenant with our eyes, that if they wander they shall be sure to weep for it. Look not
thou upon the wine that is red, upon the woman that is fair; close the right eye that thus of-
fense thee, to prevent the necessity of plucking it out, and casting it from thee, Matt. v. 28,
29. [2.] It proceeded out of the heart. He owns, I coveted them. Thus lust conceived and
brought forth this sin. Those that would be kept from sinful actions must mortify and check
in themselves sinful desires, particularly the desire of worldly wealth, which we more partic-
ularly call covetousness. O what a world of evil is the love money the root of! Had Achan
looked upon these things with an eye of faith, he would have seen them accursed things,
and would have dreaded them, but, looking upon them with an eye of sense only, he saw
them goodly things, and coveted them. It was not the looking, but the lusting that ruined
him. [3.] When he had committed it he was very industrious to conceal it. Having taken of
79
Chapter VII
the forbidden treasures, fearing lest any search should be made for prohibited goods, he hid
them in the earth, as one that resolved to keep what he had gotten, and never to make
restitution. Thus does Achan confess the whole matter, that God might be justified in the
sentence passed upon him. See the deceitfulness of sin; that which is pleasing in the commis-
sion is bitter in the reflection; at the last it bites like a serpent. Particularly, see what comes
of ill-gotten goods, and how those will be cheated that rob God. Job xx. 15, He hath swallowed
down riches, and he shall vomit them up again.
IV. His conviction. God had convicted him by the lot; he had convicted himself by his
own confession; but, that no room might be left for the most discontented Israelite to object
against the process, Joshua has him further convicted by the searching of his tent, in which
the goods were found which he confessed to. Particular notice is taken of the haste which
the messengers made that were sent to search: They ran to the tent (v. 22), not only to show
their readiness to obey Joshua's orders, but to show how uneasy they were till the camp was
cleared of the accursed thing, that they might regain the divine favour. Those that feel
themselves under wrath find themselves concerned not to defer the putting away of sin.
Delays are dangerous, and it is not time to trifle. When the stolen goods were brought they
were laid out before the Lord (v. 23), that all Israel might see how plain the evidence was
against Achan, and might adore the strictness of God's judgments in punishing so severely
the stealing of such small things, and yet the justice of his judgments in maintaining his
right to devoted things, and might be afraid of ever offending in the like kind. In laying
them out before the Lord they acknowledged his title to them, and waited to receive his
directions concerning them. Note, Those that think to put a cheat upon God do but deceive
themselves; what is taken from him he will recover (Hos. ii. 9) and he will be a loser by no
man at last.
V. His condemnation. Joshua passes sentence upon him (v. 25): Why hast thou troubled
us? There is the ground of the sentence. O, how much hast thou troubled us! so some read
it. He refers to what was said when the warning was given not to meddle with the accursed
thing (ch. vi. 18), lest you make the camp of Israel a curse and trouble it. Note, Sin is a very
troublesome thing, not only to the sinner himself, but to all about him. He that is greedy of
gain, as Achan was, troubles his own house (Prov. xv. 27) and all the communities he belongs
to. Now (says Joshua) God shall trouble thee. See why Achan was so severely dealt with, not
only because he had robbed God, but because he had troubled Israel; over his head he had
(as it were) this accusation written, "Achan, the troubler of Israel," as Ahab, 1 Kings xviii.
18. This therefore is his doom: God shall trouble thee. Note, the righteous God will certainly
recompense tribulation to those that trouble his people, 2 Thess. i. 6. Those that are trouble-
some shall be troubled. Some of the Jewish doctors, from that word which determines the
troubling of him to this day, infer that therefore he should not be troubled in the world to
come; the flesh was destroyed that spirit might be saved, and, if so, the dispensation was
80
Chapter VII
really less severe than it seemed. In the description both of his sin and of his punishment,
by the trouble that was in both, there is a plain allusion to his name Achan, or, as he is called,
1 Chron. ii. 7, Achar, which signifies trouble. He did too much answer his name.
VI. His execution. No reprieve could be obtained; a gangrened member must be cut off
immediately. When he is proved to be an anathema, and the troubler of the camp, we may
suppose all the people cry out against him, Away with him, away with him! Stone him, stone
him! Here is,
1. The place of execution. They brought him out of the camp, in token of their putting
far from them that wicked person, 1 Cor. v. 13. When our Lord Jesus was made a curse for
us, that by his trouble we might have peace, he suffered as an accursed thing without the
gate, bearing our reproach, Heb. xiii. 12, 13. The execution was at a distance, that the camp
which was disturbed by Achan's sin might not be defiled by his death.
2. The persons employed in his execution. It was the act of all Israel, v. 24, 25. They were
all spectators of it, that they might see and fear. Public executions are public examples. Nay,
they were all consenting to his death, and as many as could were active in it, in token of the
universal detestation in which they held his sacrilegious attempt, and their dread of God's
displeasure against them.
3. The partakers with him in the punishment; for he perished not alone in his iniquity,
ch. xxii. 20. (1.) The stolen goods were destroyed with him, the garment burnt, as it should
have been with the rest of the combustible things in Jericho, and the silver and gold defaced,
melted, lost, and buried, in the ashes of the rest of his goods under the heap of stones, so as
never to be put to any other use. (2.) All his other goods were destroyed likewise, not only
his tent, and the furniture of that, but his oxen, asses, and sheep, to show that goods gotten
unjustly, especially if they be gotten by sacrilege, will not only turn to no account, but will
blast and waste the rest of the possessions to which they are added. The eagle in the fable,
that stole flesh from the altar, brought a coal of fire with it, which burnt her nest, Hab. ii. 9,
10; Zech. v. 3, 4. Those lose their own that grasp at more than their own. (3.) His sons and
daughters were put to death with him. Some indeed think that they were brought out (v. 24)
only to be the spectators of their father's punishment, but most conclude that they died with
him, and that they must be meant v. 25, where it is said they burned them with fire, after
they had stoned them with stones. God had expressly provided that magistrates should not
put the children to death for the fathers'; but he did not intend to bind himself by that law,
and in this case he had expressly ordered (v. 15) that the criminal, and all that he had, should
be burnt. Perhaps his sons and daughters were aiders and abettors in the villany, had helped
to carry off the accursed thing. It is very probable that they assisted in the concealment, and
that he could not hide them in the midst of his tent but they must know and keep his
counsel, and so they became accessaries ex post facto—after the fact; and, if they were ever
so little partakers in the crime, it was so heinous that they were justly sharers in the punish-
81
Chapter VII
ment. However God was hereby glorified, and the judgment executed was thus made the
more tremendous.
4. The punishment itself that was inflicted on him. He was stoned (some think as a
sabbath breaker, supposing that the sacrilege was committed on the sabbath day), and then
his dead body was burnt, as an accursed thing, of which there should be no remainder left.
The concurrence of all the people in this execution teaches us how much it is the interest
of a nation that all in it should contribute what they can, in their places, to the suppression
of vice and profaneness, and the reformation of manners; sin is a reproach to any people,
and therefore every Israelite indeed will have a stone to throw at it.
5. The pacifying of God's wrath hereby (v. 26): The Lord turned from the fierceness of
his anger. The putting away of sin by true repentance and reformation, as it is the only way,
so it is a sure and most effectual way, to recover the divine favour. Take away the cause, and
the effect will cease.
VII. The record of his conviction and execution. Care was taken to preserve the remem-
brance of it, for warning and instruction to posterity. 1. A heap of stones was raised on the
place where Achan was executed, every one perhaps of the congregation throwing a stone
to the heap, in token of his detestation of the crime. 2. A new name was given to the place;
it was called theValley of Achor, or trouble. This was a perpetual brand of infamy upon
Achan's name, and a perpetual warning to all people not to invade God's property. By this
severity against Achan, the honour of Joshua's government, now in the infancy of it, was
maintained, and Israel, at their entrance upon the promised Canaan, were reminded to ob-
serve, at their peril, the provisos and limitations of the grant by which they held it. The
Valley of Achor is said to be given for a door of hope, because when we put away the accursed
thing then there begins to be hope in Israel, Hos. ii. 15; Ezra x. 2.
82
