Chapter VI
Chapter VI
J O S H U A
CHAP. VI.
Joshua opened the campaign with the siege of Jericho, a city which could not trust so
much to the courage of its people as to act offensively, and to send out its forces to oppose
Israel's landing and encamping, but trusted so much to the strength of its walls as to stand
upon its defence, and not to surrender, or desire conditions of peace. Now here we have the
story of the taking of it, I. The directions and assurances which the captain of the Lord's
host gave concerning it, ver. 1-5. II. The trial of the people's patient obedience in walking
round the city six days, ver. 6-14. III. The wonderful delivery of it into their hands the seventh
day, with a solemn charge to them to use it as a devoted thing, ver. 15-21 and 24. IV. The
preservation of Rahab and her relations, ver. 22, 23, 25. V. A curse pronounced upon the
man that should dare to rebuild this city, ver. 26, 27. An abstract of this story we find among
the trophies of faith, Heb. xi. 30. "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were
compassed about seven days."
The Siege of Jericho. (b. c. 1451.)
1 Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel: none went out, and
none came in.   2 And the Lord said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand Jericho,
and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.   3 And ye shall compass the city, all ye
men of war, and go round about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.   4 And seven
priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of rams' horns: and the seventh day ye shall
compass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.   5 And it shall
come to pass, that when they make a long blast with the ram's horn, and when ye hear the
sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city
shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight before him.
We have here a contest between God and the men of Jericho, and their different resolu-
tions, upon which it is easy to say whose word shall prevail.
I. Jericho resolves Israel shall not be its master, v. 1. It was straitly shut up, because of
the children of Israel. It did shut up, and it was shut up (so it is in the margin); it did shut up
itself, being strongly fortified both by art and nature, and it was shut up by the obstinacy
and resolution of the inhabitants, who agreed never to surrender nor so much as sound a
parley; none went out as deserters or to treat of peace, nor were any admitted in to offer
peace. Thus were they infatuated, and their hearts hardened to their own destruction—the
miserable case and character of all those that strengthen themselves against the Almighty,
Job xv. 25.
II. God resolves Israel shall be its master, and that quickly, The captain of the Lord's
host, here called Jehovah, taking notice how strongly Jericho was fortified and how strictly
guarded, and knowing Joshua's thoughts and cares about reducing it, and perhaps his fears
58
Chapter VI
of a disgrace there and of stumbling at the threshold, gave him here all the assurance he
could desire of success (v. 2): See, I have given into thy hand Jericho. Not, "I will do it, but, I
have done it; it is all thy own, as sure as if it were already in thy possession." It was designed
that this city, being the first-fruits of Canaan, should be entirely devoted to God, and that
neither Joshua nor Israel should ever be one mite the richer for it, and yet it is here said to
be given into their hand; for we must reckon that most our own which we have an opportunity
of honouring God with and employing in his service. Now. 1. The captain of the Lord's host
gives directions how the city should be besieged. No trenches are to be opened, no batteries
erected, nor battering rams drawn up, nor any military preparations made; but the ark of
God must be carried by the priests round the city once a day for six days together, and seven
times the seventh day, attended by the men of war in silence, the priests all the while blowing
with trumpets of rams' horns, v. 3, 4. This was all they were to do. 2. He assures them that
on the seventh day before night they should, without fail, be masters of the town. Up on a
signal given, they must all shout, and immediately the wall should fall down, which would
not only expose the inhabitants, but so dispirit them that they would not be able to make
any resistance, v. 5. God appointed this way, (1.) To magnify his own power, that he might
be exalted in his own strength (Ps. xxi. 13), not in the strength of instruments. God would
hereby yet further make bare his own almighty arm for the encouragement of Israel and the
terror and confusion of the Canaanites. (2.) To put an honour upon his ark, the instituted
token of his presence, and to give a reason for the laws by which the people were obliged to
look upon it with the most profound veneration and respect. When, long after this, the ark
was brought into the camp without orders from God, it was looked upon as a profanation
of it, and the people paid dearly for their presumption, 1 Sam. iv. 3, &c. But now that it was
done by the divine appointment it was an honour to the ark of God, and a great encourage-
ment to the faith of Israel. (3.) It was likewise to put honour upon the priests, who were
appointed upon this occasion to carry the ark and sound the trumpets. Ordinarily the priests
were excused from war, but that this privilege, with other honours and powers that the law
had given them, might not be grudged them, in this service they are principally employed,
and so the people are made sensible what blessings they were to the public and how well
worthy of all the advantages conferred upon them. (4.) It was to try the faith, obedience,
and patience, of the people, to try whether they would observe a precept which to human
policy seemed foolish to obey and believe a promise which in human probability seemed
impossible to be performed. They were also proved whether they could patiently bear the
reproaches of their enemies and patiently wait for the salvation of the Lord. Thus by faith,
not by force, the walls of Jericho fell down. (5.) It was to encourage the hope of Israel with
reference to the remaining difficulties that were before them. That suggestion of the evil
spies that Canaan could never be conquered because the cities were walled up to heaven
(Deut. i. 28) would by this be for ever silenced. The strongest and highest walls cannot hold
59
Chapter VI
out against Omnipotence; they needed not to fight, and therefore needed not to fear, because
God fought for them.
6 And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them, Take up the ark of
the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the
Lord.   7 And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and let him that is
armed pass on before the ark of the Lord.   8 And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken
unto the people, that the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns passed on
before the Lord, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the covenant of the Lord followed
them.   9 And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the trumpets, and the
rereward came after the ark, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.   10 And
Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor make any noise with
your voice, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout;
then shall ye shout.   11 So the ark of the Lord compassed the city, going about it once: and
they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.   12 And Joshua rose early in the morning,
and the priests took up the ark of the Lord.   13 And seven priests bearing seven trumpets
of rams' horns before the ark of the Lord went on continually, and blew with the trumpets:
and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the ark of the Lord, the
priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.   14 And the second day they compassed
the city once, and returned into the camp: so they did six days.   15 And it came to pass on
the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city
after the same manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven times.
  16 And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew with the trumpets, Joshua
said unto the people, Shout; for the Lord hath given you the city.
We have here an account of the cavalcade which Israel made about Jericho, the orders
Joshua gave concerning it, as he had received them from the Lord and their punctual observ-
ance of these orders. We do not find that he gave the people the express assurances God
had given him that he would deliver the city into their hands; but he tried whether they
would obey orders with a general confidence that it would end well, and we find them very
observant both of God and Joshua.
I. Wherever the ark went the people attended it, v. 9. The armed men went before it to
clear the way, not thinking it any disparagement to them, though they were men of war, to
be pioneers to the ark of God. If any obstacle should be found in crossing the roads that led
to the city (which they must do in walking round it) they would remove it; if any opposition
should be made by the enemy, they would encounter it, that the priests' march with the ark
might be easy and safe. It is an honour to the greatest men to do any good office to the ark
and to serve the interests of religion in their country. The rereward, either another body of
armed men, or Dan's squadron, which marched last through the wilderness, or, as some
think, the multitude of the people who were not armed or disciplined for war (as many of
60
Chapter VI
them as would) followed the ark, to testify their respect to it, to grace the solemnity, and to
be witnesses of what was done. Every faithful zealous Israelite would be willing to undergo
the same fatigues and run the same hazard with the priests that bore the ark.
II. Seven priests went immediately before the ark, having trumpets in their hands, with
which they were continually sounding, v. 4, 5, 9, 13. The priests were God's ministers, and
thus in his name, 1. They proclaimed war with the Canaanites, and so stuck a terror upon
them; for by terrors upon their spirits they were to be conquered and subdued. Thus God's
ministers, by the solemn declarations of his wrath against all ungodliness and unrighteousness
of men, must blow the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in the holy mountain, that the
sinners in Zion may be afraid. They are God's heralds to denounce war against all those that
go on still in their trespasses, but say, "We shall have peace, though we go on." 2. They pro-
claimed God's gracious presence with Israel, and so put life and courage into them. It was
appointed that when they went to war the priests should encourage them with the assurance
of God's presence with them, Deut. xx. 2-4. And particularly their blowing with trumpets
was to be a sign to the people that they should be remembered before the Lord Their God
in the day of battle, Num. x. 9. It encouraged Abijah, 2 Chron. xiii. 12. Thus God's ministers,
by sounding the Jubilee trumpet of the everlasting gospel, which proclaims liberty and victory,
must encourage the good soldiers of Jesus Christ in their spiritual warfare.
III. The trumpets they used were not those silver trumpets which were appointed to be
made for their ordinary service, but trumpets of rams' horns, bored hollow for the purpose,
as some think. These trumpets were of the basest matter, dullest sound, and least show, that
the excellency of the power might be of God. Thus by the foolishness of preaching, fitly
compared to the sounding of these rams' horns, the devil's kingdom is thrown down; and
the weapons of our warfare, though they are not carnal nor seem to a carnal eye likely to
bring any thing to pass, are yet mighty through God to the pulling down of strong-holds, 2
Cor. x. 4, 5. The word here is trumpets of Jobel, that is, such trumpets as they used to blow
withal in the year of jubilee; so many interpreters understand it, as signifying the complete
liberty to which Israel was now brought, and the bringing of the land of Canaan into the
hands of its just and rightful owners.
IV. All the people were commanded to be silent, not to speak a word, nor make any
noise (v. 10), that they might the more carefully attend to the sound of the sacred trumpets,
which they were now to look upon as the voice of God among them; and it does not become
us to speak when God is speaking. It likewise intimates their reverent expectation of the
event. Zech. ii. 13, Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord. Exod. xiv. 14, God shall fight, and
you shall hold your peace.
V. They were to do this once a day for six days together and seven times the seventh
day, and they did so, v. 14, 15. God could have caused the walls of Jericho to fall upon the
first surrounding of them, but they must go round them thirteen times before they fall, that
61
Chapter VI
they might be kept waiting patiently for the Lord. Though they had lately come into Canaan,
and their time was very precious (for they had a great deal of work before them), yet they
must linger so many days about Jericho, seeming to do nothing, nor to make any progress
in their business. As promised deliverances must be expected in God's way, so they must
be expected in his time. He that believes does not make haste, not more haste than God would
have him make. Go yet seven times, before any thing hopeful appears, 1 Kings xviii. 43.
VI. One of these days must needs be a sabbath day, and the Jews say that it was the last,
but this is not certain; however, if he that appointed them to rest on the other sabbath days
appointed them to walk on this, that was sufficient to justify them in it; he never intended
to bind himself by his own laws, but that when he pleased he might dispense with them.
The impotent man went upon this principle when he argued (John v. 11), He that made me
whole (and therefore has a divine power) said unto me, Take up thy bed. And, in this case
here, it was an honour to the sabbath day, by which our time is divided into weeks, that just
seven days were to be spent in this work, and seven priests were employed to sound seven
trumpets, this number being, on this occasion, as well as many others, made remarkable,
in remembrance of the six day's work of creation and the seventh day's rest from it. And,
besides, the law of the sabbath forbids our own work, which is servile and secular, but this
which they did was a religious act. It is certainly no breach of the sabbath rest to do the
sabbath work, for the sake of which the rest was instituted; and what is the sabbath work
but to attend the ark in all its motions?
VII. They continued to do this during the time appointed, and seven times the seventh
day, though they saw not any effect of it, believing that at the end the vision would speak
and not lie, Hab. ii. 3. If we persevere in the way of duty, we shall lose nothing by it in the
long run. It is probable they walked at such a distance from the walls as to be out of the
reach of the enemies' arrows and out of the hearing of their scoffs. We may suppose the
oddness of the thing did at first amuse the besieged, but by the seventh day they had grown
secure, feeling no harm from that which perhaps they looked upon as an enchantment.
Probably they bantered the besiegers, as those mentioned in Neh. iv. 2, "What do these feeble
Jews? Is this the people we thought so formidable? Are these their methods of attack?" Thus
they cried peace and safety, that the destruction might be the more terrible when it came.
Wicked men (says bishop Hall) think God in jest when he is preparing for their judgment;
but they will be convinced of their mistake when it is too late.
VIII. At last they were to give a shout, and did so, and immediately the walls fell, v. 16.
This was a shout for mastery, a triumphant shout; the shout of a king is among them, Num.
xxiii. 21. This was a shout of faith; they believed that the walls of Jericho would fall, and by
this faith the walls were thrown down. It was a shot of prayer, an echo to the sound of the
trumpets which proclaimed the promise that God would remember them; with one accord,
as one man, they cry to heaven for help, and help comes in. Some allude to this to show that
62
Chapter VI
we must never expect a complete victory over our own corruptions till the very evening of
our last day, and then we shall shout in triumph over them, when we come to the number
and measure of our perfection, as bishop Hall expresses it. A good heart (says he) groans
under the sense of his infirmities, fain would be rid of them, and strives and prays, but, when
all is done, until the end of the seventh day it cannot be; then judgment shall be brought forth
unto victory. And at the end of time, when our Lord shall descend from heaven with a shout,
and the sound of a trumpet, Satan's kingdom shall be completely ruined, and not till then,
when all opposing rule, principality, and power, shall be effectually and eternally put down.
Jericho Destroyed; Preservation of Rahab. (b. c. 1451.)
17 And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are therein, to the Lord: only Rahab
the harlot shall live, she and all that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers
that we sent.   18 And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest ye make
yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of Israel a curse,
and trouble it.   19 But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are consecrated
unto the Lord: they shall come into the treasury of the Lord.   20 So the people shouted when
the priests blew with the trumpets: and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of
the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down flat, so that
the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.   21
And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, young and old,
and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.   22 But Joshua had said unto the
two men that had spied out the country, Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence
the woman, and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.   23 And the young men that were
spies went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren,
and all that she had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the camp
of Israel.   24 And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only the silver, and
the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the
Lord.   25 And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father's household, and all that
she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day; because she hid the messengers, which
Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.   26 And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed
be the man before the Lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the
foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.  
27 So the Lord was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout all the country.
The people had religiously observed the orders given them concerning the besieging of
Jericho, and now at length Joshua had told them (v. 16), "The Lord hath given you the city,
enter and take possession." Accordingly in these verses we have,
I. The rules they were to observe in taking possession. God gives it to them, and therefore
may direct it to what uses and intents, and clog it with what provisos and limitations he
thinks fit. It is given to them to be devoted to God, as the first and perhaps the worst of all
63
Chapter VI
the cities of Canaan. 1. The city must be burnt, and all the lives in it sacrificed without mercy
to the justice of God. All this they knew was included in those words, v. 17. The city shall
be a cherem, a devoted thing, at and all therein, to the Lord. No life in it might be ransomed
upon any terms; they must all be surely put to death, Lev. xxvii. 29. So he appoints from
whom as creatures they had received their lives, and to whom as sinners they had forfeited
them; and who may dispute his sentence? Is God unrighteous, who thus taketh vengeance?
God forbid we should entertain such a thought! There was more of God seen in the taking
of Jericho than of any other of the cities of Canaan, and therefore that must be more than
any other devoted to him. And the severe usage of this city would strike a terror upon all
the rest and melt their hearts yet more before Israel. Only, when this severity is ordered,
Rahab and her family are excepted: She shall live and all that are with her. She had distin-
guished herself from her neighbours by the kindness she showed to Israel, and therefore
shall be distinguished from them by the speedy return of that kindness. 2. All the treasure
of it, the money and plate and valuable goods, must be consecrated to the service of the
tabernacle, and brought into the stock of dedicated things, the Jews say because the city was
taken on the sabbath day. Thus God would be honoured by the beautifying and enriching
of his tabernacle; thus preparation was made for the extraordinary expenses of his service;
and thus the Israelites were taught not to set their hearts upon worldly wealth nor to aim at
heaping up abundance of it for themselves. God had promised them a land flowing with
milk and honey, not a land abounding with silver and gold; for he would have them live
comfortably in it, that they might serve him cheerfully, but not covet either to trade with
distant countries or to hoard for after times. He would likewise have them to reckon them-
selves enriched in the enriching of the tabernacle, and to think that which was laid up in
God's house as truly their honour and wealth as if it had been laid up in their own. 3. A
particular caution is given them to take heed of meddling with the forbidden spoil; for what
was devoted to God, if they offered to appropriate it to their own use, would prove accursed
to them; therefore (v. 18) "In any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing; you will find
yourselves inclined to reach towards it, but check yourselves, and frighten yourselves from
having any thing to do with it." He speaks as if he foresaw the sin of Achan, which we have
an account of in the next chapter, when he gives this reason for the caution, lest you make
the camp of Israel a curse and trouble it, as it proved that Achan did.
II. The entrance that was opened to them into the city by the sudden fall of the walls,
or at least that part of the wall over against which they then were when they gave the shout
(v. 20): The wall fell down flat, and probably killed abundance of people, the guards that
stood sentinel upon it, or others that crowded about it, to look at the Israelites that were
walking round. We read of thousands killed by the fall of a wall, 1 Kings xx. 30. That which
they trusted to for defence proved their destruction. The sudden fall of the wall, no doubt,
put the inhabitants into such a consternation that they had no strength nor spirit to make
64
Chapter VI
any resistance, but they became an easy prey to the sword of Israel, and saw to how little
purpose it was to shut their gates against a people that had the Lord on the head of them,
Mic. ii. 13. Note, The God of heaven easily can, and certainly will, break down all the opposing
power of his and his church's enemies. Gates of brass and bars of iron are, before him, but
as straw and rotten wood, Isa. xlv. 1, 2. Who will bring me into the strong city? Wilt not thou,
O God? Ps. lx. 9, 10. Thus shall Satan's kingdom fall, nor shall any prosper that harden
themselves against God.
III. The execution of the orders given concerning this devoted city. All that breathed
were put to the sword; not only the men that were found in arms, but the women, and
children, and old people. Though they cried for quarter, and begged ever so earnestly for
their lives, there was no room for compassion, pity must be forgotten: they utterly destroyed
all, v. 21. If they had not had a divine warrant under the seal of miracles for this execution,
it could not have been justified, nor can it justify the like now, when we are sure no such
warrant can be produced. But, being appointed by the righteous Judge of heaven and earth
to do it, who is not unrighteous in taking vengeance, they are to be applauded in doing it
as the faithful ministers of his justice. Work for God was then bloody work; and cursed was
he that did it deceitfully, keeping back his sword from blood, Jer. xlviii. 10. But the spirit of
the gospel is very different, for Christ came not to destroy men's lives but to save them, Luke
ix. 56. Christ's victories were of another nature. The cattle were put to death with the owners,
as additional sacrifices to the divine justice. The cattle of the Israelites, when slain at the altar,
were accepted as sacrifices for them, but the cattle of these Canaanites were required to be
slain as sacrifices with them, for their iniquity was not to be purged with sacrifice and offering:
both were for the glory of God. 2. The city was burnt with fire, and all that was in it, v. 24.
The Israelites, perhaps, when they had taken Jericho, a large and well-built city, hoped they
should have that for their head-quarters; but God will have them yet to dwell in tents, and
therefore fires this nest, lest they should nestle in it. 3. All the silver and gold, and all those
vessels which were capable of being purified by fire, were brought into the treasury of the
house of the Lord; not that he needed it but that he would be honoured by it, as the Lord of
hosts, of their hosts in particular, the God that gave the victory and therefore might demand
the spoil, either the whole, as here, or, as sometimes, a tenth, Heb. vii. 4.
IV. The preservation of Rahab the harlot, or inn-keeper, who perished not with those
that believed not, Heb. xi. 31. The public faith was engaged for her safety by the two spies,
who acted therein as public persons; and therefore, though the hurry they were in at the
taking of the town was no doubt very great, yet Joshua took effectual care for her preservation.
The same persons that she had secured were employed to secure her, v. 22, 23. They were
best able to do it who knew her and her house, and they were fittest to do it, that it might
appear it was for the sake of her kindness to them that she was thus distinguished and had
her life given her for a prey. All her kindred were saved with her; like Noah she believed to
65
Chapter VI
the saving of her house; and thus faith in Christ brings salvation to the house, Acts xvi. 31.
Some ask how her house, which is said to have been upon the wall (ch. ii. 15), escaped falling
with the wall; we are sure it did escape, for she and her relations were safe in it, either though
it joined so near to the wall as to be said to be upon it, yet it was so far off as not to fall either
with the wall or under it; or, rather, that part of the wall on which her house stood fell not.
Now being preserved alive, 1. She was left for some time without the camp to be purified
from the Gentile superstition, which she was to renounce, and to be prepared for her admis-
sion as a proselyte. 2. She was in due time incorporated with the church of Israel, and she
and her posterity dwelt in Israel, and her family was remarkable long after. We find her the
wife of Salmon, prince of Judah, mother of Boaz, and named among the ancestors of our
Saviour, Matt. i. 5. Having received Israelites in the name of Israelites, she had an Israelite's
reward. Bishop Pierson observes that Joshua's saving Rahab the harlot, and admitting her
into Israel, were a figure of Christ's receiving into his kingdom, and entertaining there, the
publicans and the harlots, Matt. xxi. 31. Or it may be applied to the conversion of the Gentiles.
V. Jericho is condemned to a perpetual desolation, and a curse pronounced upon the
man that at any time hereafter should offer to rebuild it (v. 26): Joshua adjured them, that
is, the elders and people of Israel, not only by their own consent, obliging themselves and
their posterity never to rebuild this city, but by the divine appointment, God himself having
forbidden it under the severe penalty here annexed. 1. God would hereby show the weight
of a divine curse; where it rests there is no contending with it nor getting from under it; it
brings ruin without remedy or repair. 2. He would have it to remain in its ruins a standing
monument of his wrath against the Canaanites when the measure of their iniquity was full,
and of his mercy to his people when the time had come for their settlement in Canaan. The
desolations of their enemies were witnesses of his favour to them, and would upbraid them
with their ingratitude to that God who had done so much for them. The situation of the city
was very pleasant, and probably its nearness to Jordan was an advantage to it, which would
tempt men to build upon the same spot; but they are here told it is at their peril if they do
it. Men build for their posterity, but he that builds Jericho shall have no posterity to enjoy
what he builds; his eldest son shall die when he begins the work, and if he take not warning
by that stroke to desist, but will go on presumptuously, the finishing of his work shall be
attended with the funeral of his youngest, and we must suppose all the rest cut off between.
This curse, not being a curse causeless, did come upon that man who long after rebuilded
Jericho (1 Kings xvi. 34), but we are not to think it made the place ever the worse when it
was built, or brought any hurt to those that inhabited it. We find Jericho afterwards graced
with the presence, not only of those two great prophets Elijah and Elisha, but of our blessed
Saviour himself, Luke xviii. 35; xix. 1; Matt. xx. 29. Note, It is a dangerous thing to attempt
the building up of that which God will have to be destroyed. See Mal. i. 4.
66
Chapter VI
Lastly, All this magnified Joshua and raised his reputation (v. 27); it made him not only
acceptable to Israel, but formidable to the Canaanites, because it appeared that God was
with him of a truth: the Word of the Lord was with him, so the Chaldee, even Christ himself,
the same that was with Moses. Nothing can more raise a man's reputation, nor make him
appear more truly great, than to have the evidences of God's presence with him.
67
