Chapter IX
Chapter IX
J O S H U A
CHAP. IX.
Here is in this chapter, I. The impolite confederacy of the kings of Canaan against Israel,
ver. 1, 2. II. The polite confederacy of the inhabitants of Gibeon with Israel, 1. How it was
subtly proposed and petitioned for by the Gibeonites pretending to come from a far country,
ver. 3-13. 2. How it was unwarily consented to by Joshua and the Israelites, to the disgust
of the congregation when the fraud was discovered, ver. 14-18. 3. How the matter was ad-
justed to the satisfaction of all sides, by giving these Gibeonites their lives because they had
covenanted with them, yet depriving them of their liberties because the covenant was not
fairly obtained, ver. 19-27.
The Application of the Gibeonites. (b. c. 1450.)
1 And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side Jordan, in the hills,
and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite,
and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof;  
2 That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one
accord.
Hitherto the Canaanites had acted defensively; the Israelites were the aggressors upon
Jericho and Ai. But here the kings of Canaan are in consultation to attack Israel, and concert
matters for a vigorous effort of their united forces to check the progress of their victorious
arms. Now, 1. It was strange they did not do this sooner. They had notice long since of their
approach; Israel's design upon Canaan was no secret; one would have expected that a prudent
concern for their common safety would put them upon taking some measures to oppose
their coming over Jordan, and maintain that pass against them, or to give them a warm re-
ception as soon as they were over. It was strange they did not attempt to raise the siege of
Jericho, or at least fall in with the men of Ai, when they had given them a defeat. But they
were, either through presumption or despair, wonderfully infatuated and at their wits' end.
Many know not the things that belong to their peace till they are hidden from their eyes. 2.
It was more strange that they did it now. Now that the conquest of Jericho had given such
a pregnant proof of God's power, and that of Ai of Israel's policy, one would have thought
the end of their consultation should be, not to fight with Israel, but to make peace with
them, and to gain the best terms they could for themselves. This would have been their
wisdom (Luke xiv. 32), but their minds were blinded, and their hearts hardened to their
destruction. Observe, (1.) What induced them now at last to enter upon this consultation.
When they heard thereof (v. 1), not only of the conquest of Jericho and Ai, but of the con-
vention of the states of Mount Ebal, of which we have an account immediately before,—when
they heard that Joshua, as if he thought himself already completely master of the country,
had had all his people together, and had read the laws to them by which they must be gov-
94
Chapter IX
erned, and taken their promises to submit to those laws,—then they perceived the Israelites
were in good earnest, and thought it was high time for them to bestir themselves. The pious
devotion of God's people sometimes provokes and exasperates their enemies more than any
thing else. (2.) How unanimous they were in their resolves. Though they were many kings
of different nations, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, &c., doubtless of different interests, and
that had often been at variance one with another, yet they determined, nemine contra-
dicente—unanimously, to unite against Israel. O that Israel would learn this of Canaanites,
to sacrifice private interests to the public welfare, and to lay aside all animosities among
themselves, that they may cordially unite against the common enemies of God's kingdom
among men!
The Artifice of the Gibeonites. (b. c. 1450.)
3 And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto Jericho and
to Ai,   4 They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had been ambassadors, and
took old sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up;   5 And old
shoes and clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread of their
provision was dry and mouldy.   6 And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and
said unto him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now therefore make
ye a league with us.   7 And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell
among us; and how shall we make a league with you?   8 And they said unto Joshua, We are
thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who are ye? and from whence come ye?   9 And
they said unto him, From a very far country thy servants are come because of the name of
the Lord thy God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,   10 And
all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of
Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, which was at Ashtaroth.   11 Wherefore our elders and
all the inhabitants of our country spake to us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey,
and go to meet them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefore now make ye a
league with us.   12 This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on the
day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and it is mouldy:   13 And these
bottles of wine, which we filled, were new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments
and our shoes are become old by reason of the very long journey.   14 And the men took of
their victuals, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord.
Here, I. The Gibeonites desire to make peace with Israel, being alarmed by the tidings
they heard of the destruction of Jericho, v. 3. Other people heard those tidings, and were
irritated thereby to make war upon Israel; but the Gibeonites heard them and were induced
to make peace with them. Thus the discovery of the glory and grace of God in the gospel is
to some a savour of life unto life, but to others a savour of death unto death, 2 Cor. ii. 16. The
same sun softens wax and hardens clay. I do not remember that we read any where of a king
of Gibeon. Had their government been at this time in a single person, perhaps his heart
95
Chapter IX
would have been too high to yield to Israel, and he would have joined with the rest of the
kings against Israel. But these four united cities (mentioned v. 17) seem to have been governed
by elders, or senators (v. 11), who consulted the common safety more than their own per-
sonal dignity. The inhabitants of Gibeon did well for themselves. We have,
II. The method they took to compass it. They knew that all the inhabitants of the land
of Canaan were to be cut off; perhaps they had some spies in the congregation at Ebal, when
the law was read, who observed and brought them notice of the command given to Israel
(Deut. vii. 1-3), that they should show no mercy to the Canaanites, give them no quarter in
battle, which made them afraid of fighting them, and that they should make no covenant
with them, which made them despair of gaining any advantage by treating with them; and
therefore there was no way of saving their lives from the sword of Israel unless they could,
by disguising themselves, make Joshua believe that they came from some very country,
which the Israelites were not commanded to make war upon nor forbidden to make peace
with, but were particularly appointed to offer peace to, Deut. xx. 10, 15. Unless they could
be admitted under this notion, they saw there was but one way with them: they must submit
to the fate of Jericho and Ai. Though the neighbouring princes knew that all the men thereof
were mighty (ch. x. 2), and they knew it themselves, yet they durst not contend with Israel,
who had an Almighty God on their side. This therefore is the only game they have to play,
and observe,
1. They play it very artfully and successfully. Never was any such thing more craftily
managed.
(1.) They come under the character of ambassadors from a foreign state, which they
thought would please the princes of Israel, and make them proud of the honour of being
courted by distant countries: we find Hezekiah fond of those that came to him from a far
country (Isa. xxxix. 3); they were not used to be thus courted.
(2.) They pretended to have undergone the fatigues of a very long journey, and produced
what passed for an ocular demonstration of it. It should seem it was then usual for those
that undertook long journeys to take with them, as we do now for long voyages, all manner
of provision in kind, the country not being furnished as ours is now with houses of enter-
tainment, for the convenience of which, when we have occasion to make use of them, we
have reason to be very thankful. Now they here pretended that their provision, when they
brought it from home, was fresh and new, but now it appeared to be old and dry, whereas
it might well be presumed they had not loitered, but made the best of their way; so that
hence it must be inferred that they came, as they said they did, from a very far country: their
sacks or portmanteaus were old; the wine was all drunk, and the bottles in which it had been
were broken; their shoes and clothes were worse than those of the Israelites in forty years,
and their bread was mouldy, v. 4, 5, and again, v. 12, 13. Thus God's Israel have often been
deceived and imposed upon with a show of antiquity. But (as bishop Hall expresses it) errors
96
Chapter IX
are never the older for being patched, and so seeming old; but those that will be caught with
this Gibeonitish stratagem prove they have not consulted with God. And thus there are
those who make themselves poor with the badges of want and distress and yet have great
riches (Prov. xiii. 7), or at least have no need of relief, by which fraud charity is misplaced
and diverted from those that are real objects of it.
(3.) When they were suspected, and more strictly examined as to whence they came,
they industriously declined telling the name of their country, till the agreement was settled.
[1.] The men of Israel suspected a fraud (v. 7): "Peradventure you dwell among us, and then
we may not, we must not, make any league with you." This might have discouraged the
Gibeonites from urging the matter any further, concluding that if the peace were made the
Israelites would not think themselves obliged to keep it, having thus solemnly protested
against it in case they dwelt among them; but, knowing that there was no hope at all if they
stood it out, they bravely ventured a submission. "Who knows but the people of Israel may
save us alive, though thus inveigled into a promise; and if we tell them at last we shall but
die." [2.] Joshua put the questions to them, Who are you? and whence come you? He finds
himself concerned to stand upon his guard against secret fraud as well as against open force.
We in our spiritual warfare must stand against the wiles of the devil, remembering he is a
subtle serpent as well as a roaring lion. In all leagues of relation and friendship we must first
try and then trust, lest we repent at leisure agreements made in haste. [3.] They would not
tell whence they came; but still repeat the same thing: We have come from a very far country,
v. 9. They will have it thought that it is a country Joshua knows nothing of nor ever heard
of, and therefore would be never the wiser if they should tell him the name of it.
(4.) They profess a respect for the God of Israel, the more to ingratiate themselves with
Joshua, and we charitably believe they were sincere in this profession: "We have come because
of the name of the Lord thy God (v. 9), because of what we have heard of that name, which
has convinced us that it is above every name, and because we have a desire towards that
name and the remembrance of it, and would gladly come under its protection."
(5.) They fetch their inducements from what had been done some time before in Moses's
reign, the tidings whereof might easily be supposed ere this to have reached distant regions,
the plagues of Egypt and the destruction of Sihon and Og (v. 9, 10), but prudently say
nothing of the destruction of Jericho and Ai (though this was the true inducement, v. 3),
because they will have it supposed that they came from home long before those conquests
were made. We need not be long to seek for reasons why we should submit to the God of
Israel; we may be furnished either with new or old, which we will.
(6.) They make a general submission—We are our servants; and humbly sue for a gen-
eral agreement—Make a league with us, v. 11. They insist not upon terms, but will be glad
of peace upon any terms; nor will the case admit of delays, lest the fraud be discovered; they
would fain have the bargain struck up immediately; if Joshua will but make a league with
97
Chapter IX
them, they have all they come for, and they hope their ragged clothes and clouted shoes will
be no exception against them. God and Israel reject none for their poverty. But,
2. There is a mixture of good and evil in their conduct. (1.) Their falsehood cannot be
justified, nor ought it to be drawn into a precedent. We must not do evil that good may
come. Had they owned their country but renounced the idolatries of it, resigning the pos-
session of it to Israel and themselves to the God of Israel, we have reason to think Joshua
would have been directed by the oracle of God to spare their lives, and they needed not to
have made these pretensions. It is observable that when they had once said, We have come
from a far country (v. 6), they found themselves necessitated to say it again (v. 9), and to say
what was utterly false concerning their bread, their bottles, and their clothes (v. 12, 13), for
one lie is an inlet to another, and that to a third, and so on. The way of that sin is down-hill.
But, (2.) Their faith and prudence are to be greatly commended. Our Lord commended
even the unjust steward, because he had done wisely and well for himself, Luke xvi. 8. In
submitting to Israel, they submitted to the God of Israel, which implied a renunciation of
the god they had served, a resignation to the laws of true religion. They had heard enough
to convince them of the infinite power of the God of Israel, and thence might infer his other
perfections of wisdom and goodness; and how can we do better for ourselves than surrender
at discretion to infinite wisdom, and cast ourselves upon the mercy of a God of infinite
goodness. The submission of these Gibeonites was the more laudable because it was, [1.]
Singular. Their neighbours took another course, and expected they should join with them.
[2.] Speedy. They did not stay till Israel had besieged their cities; then it would have been
too late to capitulate; but when they were at some distance they desired conditions of peace.
Thy way to avoid a judgment is to meet it by repentance. Let us imitate these Gibeonites,
and make our peace with God in the rags of humiliation, godly sorrow, and mortification,
so our iniquity shall not be our ruin. Let us be servants to Jesus, our blessed Joshua, and
make a league with him and the Israel of God, and we shall live.
The League with the Gibeonites. (b. c. 1450.)
15 And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let them live:
and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.   16 And it came to pass at the end of
three days after they had made a league with them, that they heard that they were their
neighbours, and that they dwelt among them.   17 And the children of Israel journeyed, and
came unto their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and
Beeroth, and Kirjath-jearim.   18 And the children of Israel smote them not, because the
princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel. And all the
congregation murmured against the princes.   19 But all the princes said unto all the con-
gregation, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel: now therefore we may not
touch them.   20 This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath be upon us,
because of the oath which we sware unto them.   21 And the princes said unto them, Let
98
Chapter IX
them live; but let them be hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation;
as the princes had promised them.
Here is, I. The treaty soon concluded with the Gibeonites, v. 15. The thing was not done
with much formality, but in short, 1. They agreed to let them live, and more the Gibeonites
did not ask. In a common war this would have been but a small matter to be granted; but
in the wars of Canaan, which were to make a general destruction, it was a great favour to a
Canaanite to have his life given him for a prey, Jer. xlv. 5. 2. This agreement was made not
by Joshua only, but by the princes of the congregation in conjunction with him. Though
Joshua had an extraordinary call to the government, and extraordinary qualifications for
it, yet he would not act in an affair of this nature without the counsel and concurrence of
the princes, who were neither kept in the dark nor kept under foot, but were treated by him
as sharers in the government. 3. It was ratified by an oath; they swore unto them, not by
any of the gods of Canaan, but by the God of Israel only, v. 19. Those that mean honestly
do not startle at assurances, but satisfy those with whom they treat, and glorify God by
calling him to witness to the sincerity of their intentions. 4. Nothing appears to have been
culpable in all this but that it was done rashly; they took of their victuals, by which they
satisfied themselves that it was indeed old and dry, but did not consider that this was no
proof of their bringing it fresh from home; so that, making use of their senses only, but not
their reason, they received the men (as the margin reads it) because of their victuals, perceiving
perhaps, upon the view and taste of their bread, not only that now it was old, but that it had
been fine and very good at first, whence they inferred that they were persons of some quality,
and therefore the friendship of their country was not to be despised. But they asked not
counsel at the mouth of the Lord. They had the Urim and Thummim with them, which they
might have advised with in this difficult case, and which would have told them no lie, would
have led them into no error; but they relied so much on their own politics that they thought
it needless to bring the matter to the oracle. Joshua himself was not altogether without blame
herein. Note, We make more haste than good speed in any business when we stay not to
take God along with us, and by the word and prayer to consult him. Many a time we see
cause to reflect upon it with regret that such and such an affair miscarried, because we asked
not counsel at the mouth of the Lord; would we acknowledge him in all our ways, we should
find them more safe, easy, and successful.
II. The fraud soon discovered, by which this league was procured. A lying tongue is but
for a moment, and truth will be the daughter of time. Within three days they found, to their
great surprise, that the cities which these ambassadors had treated for were very near them,
but one night's foot-march from the camp at Gilgal, ch. x. 9. Either their own scouts or the
parties that sallied out to acquaint themselves with the country, or perhaps some deserters
that came over to them from the enemy, informed them of the truth in this matter. Those
99
Chapter IX
that suffer themselves to be deceived by the wiles of Satan will soon be undeceived to their
confusion, and will find that near, even at the door, which they imagined was very far off.
III. The disgust of the congregation at this. They did indeed submit to the restraints
which this league laid upon them, and smote not the cities of the Gibeonites, neither slew
the persons nor seized the prey; but it vexed them to have their hands thus tied, and they
murmured against the princes (v. 18) it is to be feared, more from a jealousy for their own
profit than from a zeal for the fulfilling of God's command, though some of them perhaps
had a regard to that. Many are forward to arraign and censure the actions of princes while
they are ignorant of the springs of those actions and are incompetent judges of the reasons
of state that govern them. While therefore we are satisfied in general that those who are over
us aim at nothing but the public good, and sincerely seek the welfare of their people, we
ought to make the best of what they do and not exercise ourselves in things above us.
IV. The prudent endeavour of the princes to pacify the discontented congregation, and
to accommodate the matter; herein all the princes concurred and were unanimous, which
doubtless disposed the people to acquiesce.
1. They resolved to spare the lives of the Gibeonites, for so they had expressly sworn to
do (v. 15), to let them live. (1.) The oath was lawful, else it had not bound them any more
than Herod's oath bound him to cut off John Baptist's head; it is true God had appointed
them to destroy all the Canaanites, but the law must be construed, in favorem vitæ—with
some tender allowance, to mean those only that stood it out and would not surrender their
country to them, and not to bind them so far to put off the sense of honour and humanity
as to slay those who had never lifted up a hand against them nor ever would, but before they
were reduced to any extremity, or ever attempted any act of hostility, with one consent
humbled themselves; the kings of Israel were certainly more merciful kings than to do so (1
Kings xx. 31), and the God of Israel a more merciful God than to order it so. Satis est pros-
trasse leoni—It is enough to have laid the lion prostrate. And besides, the reason of the law
is the law; the mischief designed to be prevented by that law was the infecting of the Israelites
with their idolatry, Deut. vii. 4. But if the Gibeonites renounce their idolatry, and become
friends and servants to the house of God, the danger is effectually prevented, the reason of
the law ceases, and consequently the obligation of it, especially to a thing of this nature. The
conversion of sinners shall prevent their ruin. (2.) The oath being lawful, both the princes
and the people for whom they transacted were bound by it, bound in conscience, bound in
honour to the God of Israel, by whom they had sworn, and whose name would have been
blasphemed by the Canaanites if they had violated this oath. They speak as those that feared
an oath (Eccl. ix. 2), when they argued thus: We will let them live, lest wrath be upon us, be-
cause of the oath which we swore, v. 20. He that ratifies a promise with an oath imprecates
the divine vengeance if he wilfully break his promise, and has reason to expect that divine
justice will take him at his word. God is not mocked, and therefore oaths are not to be jested
100
Chapter IX
with. The princes would keep their word, [1.] Though they lost by it. A citizen of Zion swears
to his own hurt and changes not, Ps. xv. 4. Joshua and the princes, when they found it was
to their prejudice that they had thus bound themselves, did not apply to Eleazar for a dis-
pensation, much less did they pretend that no faith is to be kept with heretics, with
Canaanites; no, they were strangers to the modern artifices of the Romish church to elude
the most sacred bonds, and even to sanctify perjuries [2.] Though the people were uneasy
at it, and their discontent might have ended in a mutiny, yet the princes would not violate
their engagement to the Gibeonites; we must never be over-awed, either by majesty or
multitude, to do a sinful thing, and go against our consciences. [3.] Though they were drawn
into this league by a wile, and might have had a very plausible pretence to declare it null
and void, yet they adhered to it. They might have pleaded that though those were the men
with whom they exchanged the ratifications, yet these were not the cities intended in the
league; they had promised to spare certain cities, without names, that were very far off, and
upon the express consideration of their being so; but these were very near, and therefore
not the cities that they covenanted with. And many learned men have thought that they
were so grossly imposed upon by the Gibeonites that it would have been lawful for them to
have recalled their promise, but to preserve their reputation, and to keep up in Israel a
veneration of an oath, they would stand to it; but it is plain that they thought themselves
indispensably obliged by it, and were apprehensive that the wrath of God would fall upon
them if they broke it. And, however their adherence to it might be displeasing to the con-
gregation, it is plain that it was acceptable to God; for when, in pursuance of this league,
they undertook the protection of the Gibeonites, God gave them the most glorious victory
that ever they had in all their wars (ch. x.), and long afterwards severely avenged the wrong
Saul did to the Gibeonites in violation of this league, 2 Sam. xxi. 1. Let this convince us all
how religiously we ought to perform our promises, and make good our bargains; and what
conscience we ought to make of our words when they are once given. If a covenant obtained
by so many lies and deceits might not be broken, shall we think to evade the obligation of
those that have been made with all possible honesty and fairness? If the fraud of others will
not justify or excuse our falsehood, certainly the honesty of others in dealing with us will
aggravate and condemn our dishonesty in dealing with them.
2. Though they spared their lives, yet they seized their liberties, and sentenced them to
be hewers of wood and drawers of water to the congregation, v. 21. By this proposal the dis-
contented congregation was pacified; for, (1.) Those who were angry that the Gibeonites
lived might be content when they saw them condemned to that which, in the general appre-
hension, is worse than death, perpetual servitude. (2.) Those who were angry that they were
not spoiled might be content when their serving the congregation would be more to the
public advantage than their best effects could be; and, in short, the Israelites would be not
101
Chapter IX
losers either in honour or profit by this peace with the Gibeonites; convince them of this,
and they will be satisfied.
The Gibeonites Made Bondmen. (b. c. 1450.)
22 And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying, Wherefore have ye be-
guiled us, saying, We are very far from you; when ye dwell among us?   23 Now therefore
ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of
wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.   24 And they answered Joshua, and
said, Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that the Lord thy God commanded his
servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from
before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of you, and have done this
thing.   25 And now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and right unto thee
to do unto us, do.   26 And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the
children of Israel, that they slew them not.   27 And Joshua made them that day hewers of
wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the Lord, even unto
this day, in the place which he should choose.
The matter is here settled between Joshua and the Gibeonites, and an explanation of
the league agreed upon. We may suppose that now, not the messengers who were first sent,
but the elders of Gibeon, and of the cities that were dependent upon it, were themselves
present and treated with, that the matter might be fully compromised.
I. Joshua reproves them for their fraud, v. 22. And they excuse it as well as they can, v.
24. 1. Joshua gives the reproof very mildly: Wherefore have you beguiled us? He does not
load them with any ill names, does not give them any harsh provoking language, does not
call them, as they deserved to be called, base liars, but only asks them, Why have you beguiled
us? Under the greatest provocations, it is our wisdom and duty to keep our temper, and to
bridle our passion; a just cause needs not anger to defend it, and a bad one is made never
the better by it. 2. They make the best excuse for themselves, that the thing would bear, v.
24. They found by the word of God that sentence of death was passed upon them (the
command was to destroy all the inhabitants of the land, without exception), and they found
by the works of God already wrought that there was no opposing the execution of this sen-
tence; they considered that God's sovereignty is incontestable, his justice inflexible, his power
irresistible, and therefore resolved to try what his mercy was, and found it was not in vain
to cast themselves upon it. They do not go about to justify their lie, but in effect beg pardon
for it, pleading it was purely to save their lives that they did it, which every man that finds
in himself the force of the law of self-preservation will therefore make great allowances for,
especially in such a case as this, where the fear was not merely of the power of man (if that
were all, one might flee from that to the divine protection), but of the power of God himself,
which they saw engaged against them.
102
Chapter IX
II. Joshua condemns them to servitude, as a punishment of their fraud (v. 23), and they
submit to the sentence (v. 25), and for aught that appears both sides are pleased.
1. Joshua pronounces them perpetual bondmen. They had purchased their lives with a
lie, but, that being no good consideration, he obliges them to hold their lives under the rent
and reservation of their continual labours, in hewing wood and drawing water, the meanest
and most toilsome employments. Thus their lie was punished; had they dealt fairly and
plainly with Israel, perhaps they would have had more honourable conditions granted them,
but now, since they gain their lives with ragged clothes and clouted shoes, the badges of
servitude, they are condemned for ever to wear such, so must their doom be. And thus the
ransom of their lives is paid; dominion is acquired by the preservation of a life that lies at
mercy (servus dicitur a servando—a servant is so called from the act of saving); they owe their
service to those to whom they owe their lives. Observe how the judgment is given against
them. (1.) Their servitude is made a curse to them. "Now you are cursed with the ancient
curse of Canaan," from whom these Hivites descended, a servant of servants shalt thou be,
Gen. ix. 25. What shall be done to the false tongue but this? Cursed shall it be. (2.) Yet this
curse is turned into a blessing; they must be servants, but it shall be for the house of my God.
The princes would have them slaves unto all the congregation (v. 21), at least they chose to
express themselves so, for the pacifying of the people that were discontented; but Joshua
mitigates the sentence, both in honour to God and in favour to the Gibeonites: it would be
too hard upon them to make them every man's drudge; if they must be hewers of wood and
drawers of water, than which there cannot be a greater disparagement, especially to those
who are citizens of a royal city, and all mighty men (ch. x. 2), yet they shall be so to the house
of my God, than which there cannot be a greater preferment: David himself could have
wished to be a door-keeper there. Even servile work becomes honourable when it is done
for the house of our God and the offices thereof. [1.] They were hereby excluded from the
liberties and privileges of true-born Israelites, and a remaining mark of distinction was put
upon their posterity throughout all their generations. [2.] They were hereby employed in
such services as required their personal attendance upon the altar of God in the place which
he should choose (v. 27), which would bring them to the knowledge of the law of God, keep
them strictly to that holy religion to which they were proselyted, and prevent their revolt to
the idolatries of their fathers. [3.] This would be a great advantage to the priests and Levites
to have so many, and those mighty men, constant attendants upon them, and engaged by
office to do all the drudgery of the tabernacle. A great deal of wood must be hewed for fuel
for God's house, not only to keep the fire burning continually upon the altar, but to boil the
flesh of the peace-offerings, &c. And a great deal of water must be drawn for the divers
washings which the law prescribed. These and other such servile works, such as washing
the vessels, carrying out ashes, sweeping the courts, &c., which otherwise the Levites must
have done themselves, these Gibeonites were appointed to do. [4.] They were herein servants
103
Chapter IX
to the congregation too; for whatever promotes and helps forward the worship of God is
real service to the commonwealth. It is the interest of every Israelite that the altar of God
be well attended. Hereby also the congregation was excused from much of that servile work
which perhaps would otherwise have been expected from some of them. God had made a
law that the Israelites should never make any of their brethren bondmen; if they had slaves,
they must be of the heathen that were round about them, Lev. xxv. 44. Now in honour of
this law, and of Israel that was honoured by it, God would not have the drudgery, no, not
of the tabernacle itself, to be done by Israelites, but by Gibeonites, who were afterwards
called Nethinim, men given to the Levites, as the Levites were to the priests (Num. iii. 9), to
minister to them in the service of God. [5.] This may be looked upon as typifying the admis-
sion of the Gentiles into the gospel church. Now they were taken in upon their submission
to be under-officers, but afterwards God promises that he will take of them for priests and
Levites, Isa. lxvi. 21.
2. They submit to this condition, v. 25. Conscious of a fault in framing a lie whereby to
deceive the Israelites, and sensible also how narrowly they escaped with their lives and what
a kindness it was to have them spared, they acquiesce in the proposal: Do as it seemeth right
unto thee. Better live in servitude, especially such servitude, than not live at all. Those of the
very meanest and most despicable condition are described to be hewers of wood and drawers
of water, Deut. xxix. 11. But skin for skin, liberty, and labour, and all that a man has, will
he give for his life, and no ill bargain. Accordingly the matter was determined. (1.) Joshua
delivered them out of the hands of the Israelites that they should not be slain, v. 26. It seems
there were those who would have fallen upon them with the sword if Joshua had not inter-
posed with his authority; but wise generals know when to sheathe the sword, as well as when
to draw it. (2.) He then delivered them again into the hands of the Israelites to be enslaved,
v. 27. They were not to keep possession of their cities, for we find afterwards that three of
them fell to the lot of Benjamin and one to that of Judah; nor were they themselves to be at
their own disposal, but, as bishop Patrick thinks, were dispersed into the cities of the priests
and Levites, and came up with them in their courses to serve at the altar, out of the profits
of which, it is probable, they were maintained. And thus Israel's bondmen became the Lord's
freemen, for his service in the meanest office is liberty, and his work is its own wages. And
this they got by their early submission. Let us, in like manner, submit to our Lord Jesus, and
refer our lives to him, saying, "We are in thy hand, do unto us as seemeth good and right
unto thee; only save our souls, and we shall not repent it:" if he appoint us to bear his cross,
and draw in his yoke, and serve at his altar, this shall be afterwards neither shame nor grief
to us, while the meanest office in God's service will entitle us to a dwelling in the house of
the Lord all the days of our life.
104
