Chapter XVI
Chapter XVI
J O S H U A
CHAP. XVI.
It is a pity that this and the following chapter should be separated, for both of them give
us the lot of the children of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh, who, next to Judah, were to
have the post of honour, and therefore had the first and best portion in the northern part
of Canaan, as Judah now had in the southern part. In this chapter we have, I. A general ac-
count of the lot of these two tribes together, ver. 1-4. II. The borders of the lot of Ephraim
in particular, ver. 5-10. That of Manasseh following in the next chapter.
The Lot of Joseph. (b. c. 1444.)
1 And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of
Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Beth-
el,   2 And goeth out from Beth-el to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to
Ataroth,   3 And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Beth-horon
the nether, and to Gezer: and the goings out thereof are at the sea.   4 So the children of
Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.
Though Joseph was one of the younger sons of Jacob, yet he was his eldest by his most
just and best beloved wife Rachel, was himself his best beloved son, and had been the greatest
ornament and support of his family, kept it from perishing in a time of famine, and had
been the shepherd and stone of Israel, and therefore his posterity were very much favoured
by the lot. Their portion lay in the very heart of the land of Canaan. It extended from Jordan
in the east (v. 1) to the sea, the Mediterranean Sea, in the west, so that it took up the whole
breadth of Canaan from side to side; and no question the fruitfulness of the soil answered
the blessings both of Jacob and Moses, Gen. xlix. 25, 26, and Deut. xxxiii. 13, &c. The portions
allotted to Ephraim and Manasseh are not so particularly described as those of the other
tribes; we have only the limits and boundaries of them, not the particular cities in them, as
before we had the cities of Judah and afterwards those of the other tribes. For this no reason
can be assigned, unless we may suppose that Joshua being himself of the children of Joseph
they referred it to him alone to distribute among them the several cities that lay within their
lot, and therefore did not bring in the names of their cities to the great council of their
princes who sat upon this affair, by which means it came to pass that they were not inserted
with the rest in the books.
The Inheritance of Joseph's Children. (b. c. 1444.)
5 And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was thus: even
the border of their inheritance on the east side was Ataroth-addar, unto Beth-horon the
upper;   6 And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and
the border went about eastward unto Taanath-shiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;
152
