Chapter XI
Chapter XI
J O S H U A
CHAP. XI.
This chapter continues and concludes the history of the conquest of Canaan; of the re-
duction of the southern parts we had an account in the foregoing chapter, after which we
may suppose Joshua allowed his forces some breathing-time; now here we have the story
of the war in the north, and the happy success of that war. I. The confederacy of the northern
crowns against Israel, ver. 1-5. II. The encouragement which God gave to Joshua to engage
them, ver. 6. III. His victory over them, ver. 7-9. IV. The taking of their cities, ver. 10-15. V.
The destruction of the Anakim, ver. 21, 22. VI. The general conclusion of the story of this
war, ver. 16-20, 23.
Confederacy Against Israel. (b. c. 1450.)
1 And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those things, that he sent to
Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,   2 And to
the kings that were on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth,
and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west,   3 And to the Canaanite on the east
and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in
the mountains, and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.   4 And they went
out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea
shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.   5 And when all these kings were
met together, they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.
  6 And the Lord said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to morrow about this
time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn
their chariots with fire.   7 So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them
by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.   8 And the Lord delivered them
into the hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto
Misrephoth-maim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they
left them none remaining.   9 And Joshua did unto them as the Lord bade him: he houghed
their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.
We are here entering upon the story of another campaign that Joshua made, and it was
a glorious one, no less illustrious than the former in the success of it, though in respect of
miracles it was inferior to it in glory. The wonders God then wrought for them were to an-
imate and encourage them to act vigorously themselves. Thus the war carried on by the
preaching of the gospel against Satan's kingdom was at first forwarded by miracles; but, the
war being by them sufficiently proved to be of God, the managers of it are now left to the
ordinary assistance of divine grace in the use of the sword of the Spirit, and must not expect
hail-stones nor the standing still of the sun. In this story we have,
119
Chapter XI
I. The Canaanites taking the field against Israel. They were the aggressors, God
hardening their hearts to begin the war, that Israel might be justified beyond exception in
destroying them. Joshua and all Israel had returned to the camp at Gilgal, and perhaps these
kings knew no other than that they intended to sit down content with the conquest they
had already made, and yet they prepare war against them. Note, Sinners bring ruin upon
their own heads, so that God will be justified when he speaks, and they alone shall bear the
blame for ever. Judah had now couched as a lion gone up from the prey; if the northern kings
rouse him up, it is at their peril, Gen. xlix. 9. Now, 1. Several nations joined in this confed-
eracy, some in the mountains and some in the plains, v. 2. Canaanites from east and west,
Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, &c. (v. 3), of different constitutions and divided interests
among themselves, and yet they here unite against Israel as against a common enemy. Thus
are the children of this world more unanimous, and therein wiser, than the children of light.
The oneness of the church's enemies should shame the church's friends out of their discords
and divisions, and engage them to be one. 2. The head of this confederacy was Jabin king
of Hazor (v. 1), as Adoni-zedec was of the former; it is said (v. 10) Hazor had been the head
of all those kingdoms, which could not have revolted without occasioning ill-will; but this
was forgotten and laid aside upon this occasion, by consent of parties, Luke xxiii. 12. When
they had all drawn up their forces together, every kingdom bringing in its quota, they were
a very great army, much greater than the former, as the sand on the sea shore in multitude,
and upon this account much stronger and more formidable, that they had horses and
chariots very many, which we do not find the southern kings had; hereby they had a great
advantage against Israel, for their army consisted only of foot, and they never brought horses
nor chariots into the field. Josephus tells us that the army of the Canaanites consisted of
300,000 foot, 10,000 horses, and 20,000 chariots. Many there be that rise up against God's
Israel; doubtless their numbers made them very confident of success, but it proved that so
much the greater slaughter was made of them.
II. The encouragement God gave to Joshua to give them the meeting, even upon the
ground of their own choosing (v. 6): Be not afraid because of them. Joshua was remarkable
for his courage—it was his master grace, and yet it seems he had need to be again and again
cautioned not to be afraid. Fresh dangers and difficulties make it necessary to fetch in fresh
supports and comforts from the word of God, which we have always nigh unto us, to be
made use of in every time of need. Those that have God on their side need not be disturbed
at the number and power of their enemies; more are those that are with us than those that
are against us; those have the hosts of the Lord that have the Lord of hosts engaged for them.
For his encouragement, 1. God assures him of success, and fixes the hour: To-morrow about
this time, when an engagement (it is probable) was expected and designed on both sides, I
will deliver them up slain. Though they were to be slain by the sword of Israel, yet it is spoken
of as God's work, that he would deliver them up. 2. He appoints him to hough their horses,
120
Chapter XI
hamstring them, lame them, and burn their chariots, not only that Israel might not use them
hereafter, but that they might not fear them now, their God designing this contempt to be
put upon them. Let Israel look upon their chariots but as rotten wood designed for the fire,
and their horses of war as disabled things, scarcely good enough for the cart. This encour-
agement which God here gave to Joshua no doubt he communicated to the people, who
perhaps were under some apprehensions of danger from this vast army, notwithstanding
the experience they had had of God's power engaged for them. And the wisdom and goodness
of God are to be observed, (1.) In infatuating the counsels of the enemy, that all the kings
of Canaan, who were not dispersed at such a distance from each other but that they might
have got all together in a body, did not at first confederate against Israel, but were divided
in to the southern and northern combination, and so became the less formidable. And, (2.)
In preparing his people to encounter the greater force, by breaking the less. They first engage
with five kings together, and now with many more. God proportions our trials to our strength
and our strength to our trials.
III. Joshua's march against these confederate forces, v. 7. He came upon them suddenly,
and surprised them in their quarters. He made this haste, 1. That he might put them into
the greater confusion, by giving them an alarm, when they little thought he was near them.
2. That he might be sure not to come short of the honour God had fixed, to give him the
meeting at the enemies' camp, to-morrow about this time. It is fit we should keep time with
God.
IV. His success, v. 8. He obtained the honour and advantage of a complete victory; he
smote them and chased them, in the several ways they took in their flight; some fled towards
Zidon, which lay to the northwest, others towards Mizpeh, eastward, but the parties Joshua
sent out pursued them each way. So the Lord delivered them into the hand of Israel; they
would not deliver themselves into the hands of Israel to be made proselytes and tributaries,
and so offered up to God's grace (Rom. xv. 16), and therefore God delivered them into their
hands to be made sacrifices to his justice; for God will be honoured by us or upon us.
V. His obedience to the orders given him, in destroying the horses and chariots (v. 9),
which was an instance, 1. Of his subjection to the divine will, as one under authority, that
must do as he is bidden. 2. Of his self-denial, and crossing his own genius and inclination
in compliance with God's command. 3. Of his confidence in the power of God engaged for
Israel, which enabled them to despise the chariots and horses which others trusted in, Ps.
xx. 7; xxxiii. 17. 4. Of his care to keep up in the people the like confidence in God, by taking
that from them which they would be tempted to trust too much to. This was cutting of a
right hand.
Joshua's Victories. (b. c. 1450.)
10 And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof
with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms.   11 And they
121
Chapter XI
smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them:
there was not any left to breathe: and he burnt Hazor with fire.   12 And all the cities of those
kings, and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword,
and he utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the Lord commanded.   13 But as
for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only;
that did Joshua burn.   14 And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel
took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until
they had destroyed them, neither left they any to breathe.
We have here the same improvement made of this victory as was made of that in the
foregoing chapter. 1. The destruction of Hazor is particularly recorded, because in it, and
by the king thereof, this daring design against Israel was laid, v. 10, 11. The king of Hazor,
it seems, escaped with his life out of the battle, and thought himself safe when he had got
back into his own city, and Joshua had gone in pursuit of the scattered troops another way.
But it proved that that which he thought would be for his welfare was his trap; in it he was
taken as in an evil net; there he was slain, and his city, for his sake, burned. Yet we find that
the remains of it being not well looked after by Israel the Canaanites rebuilt it, and settled
there under another king of the same name, Judg. iv. 2. 2. The rest of the cities of that part
of the country are spoken of only in general, that Joshua got them all into his hands, but
did not burn them as he did Hazor, for Israel was to dwell in great and goodly cities which
they builded not (Deut. vi. 10) and in these among the rest. And here we find Israel rolling
in blood and treasure. (1.) In the blood of their enemies; they smote all the souls (v. 1), neither
left they any to breathe (v. 14), that there might be none to infect them with the abominations
of Canaan, and none to disturb them in the possession of it. The children were cut off, lest
they should afterwards lay claim to any part of this land in the right of their parents. (2.) In
the wealth of their enemies. The spoil, and the cattle, they took for a prey to themselves, v.
14. As they were enriched with the spoil of their oppressors when they came out of Egypt,
wherewith to defray the charges of their apprenticeship in the wilderness, so they were now
enriched with the spoil of their enemies for a stock wherewith to set up in the land of Canaan.
Thus is the wealth of the sinner laid up for the just.
15 As the Lord commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command Joshua, and so
did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the Lord commanded Moses.   16 So Joshua
took all that land, the hills, and all the south country, and all the land of Goshen, and the
valley, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same;   17 Even from
the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon under
mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and smote them, and slew them.   18 Joshua
made war a long time with all those kings.   19 There was not a city that made peace with
the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they took in battle.
  20 For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in
122
Chapter XI
battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favour, but that he
might destroy them, as the Lord commanded Moses.   21 And at that time came Joshua,
and cut off the Anakims from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and
from all the mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua destroyed
them utterly with their cities.   22 There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the
children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.   23 So Joshua took
the whole land, according to all that the Lord said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an
inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from
war.
We have here the conclusion of this whole matter.
I. A short account is here given of what was done in four things:—1. The obstinacy of
the Canaanites in their opposition to the Israelites. It was strange that though it appeared
so manifestly that God fought for Israel, and in every engagement the Canaanites had the
worst of it, yet they stood it out to the last; not one city made peace with Israel, but the
Gibeonites only, who understood the things that belonged to their peace better than their
neighbours, v. 19. It is intimated that other cities might have made as good terms for
themselves, without ragged clothes and clouted shoes, if they would have humbled themselves,
but they never so much as desired conditions of peace. We here are told whence this unac-
countable infatuation came: It was of the Lord to harden their hearts, v. 20. As Pharaoh's
heart was hardened by his own pride and wilfulness first, and afterwards by the righteous
judgment of God, to his destruction, so were the hearts of these Canaanites. To punish them
for all their other follies, God left them to this, to make those their enemies whom they
might have made their friends. This was it that ruined them: they came against Israel in
battle, and gave the first blow, and therefore might have no favour shown them. Those know
not what they do who give the provocation to divine justice, or the authorized instruments
of it. Are we stronger than God? Observe here, That hardness of heart is the ruin of sinners.
Those that are stupid and secure, and heedless of divine warnings, are already marked for
destruction. What hope is there of those concerning whom God has said, Go, make their
hearts fat? 2. The constancy of the Israelites in prosecuting this war (v. 18): Joshua made
war a long time; some reckon it five years, others seven, that were spent in subduing this
land: so long God would train up Israel to war, and give them repeated instances of his
power and goodness in every new victory that he gave them. 3. The conquest of the Anakim
at last, v. 21, 22. Either this was done as they met with them where they were dispersed, as
some think, or rather it should seem the Anakim had retired to their fastnesses, and so were
hunted out and cut off at last, after all the rest of Israel's enemies. The mountains of Judah
and Israel were the habitations of those mountains of men; but not their height, nor the
strength of their caves, nor the difficulty of the passes to them, could secure, no, not these
mighty men, from the sword of Joshua. The cutting off of the sons of Anak is particularly
123
Chapter XI
mentioned because these had been such a terror to the spies forty years before, and their
bulk and strength had been thought an insuperable difficulty in the way of the reducing of
Canaan, Num. xiii. 28, 33. Even that opposition which seemed invincible was got over.
Never let the sons of Anak be a terror to the Israel of God, for even their day will come to
fall. Giants are dwarfs to Omnipotence; yet this struggle with the Anakim was reserved for
the latter end of the war, when the Israelites had become more expert in the arts of war, and
had had more experience of the power and goodness of God. Note, God sometimes reserves
the sharpest trials of his people by affliction and temptation for the latter end of their days.
Therefore let not him that girds on the harness boast as he that puts it off. Death, that tre-
mendous son of Anak, is the last enemy that is to be encountered; but it is to be destroyed,
1 Cor. xv. 26. Thanks be to God, who will give us the victory. 4. The end and issue of this
long war. The Canaanites were rooted out, not perfectly (as we shall find after in the book
of Judges), but in a good measure; they were not able to make any head either, (1.) So as to
keep the Israelites out of possession of the land: Joshua took all that land, v. 16, 17. And we
may suppose the people dispersed themselves and their families into the countries they had
conquered, at least those that lay nearest to the head-quarters at Gilgal, until an orderly
distribution should be made by lot, that every man might know his own. Or, (2.) So as to
keep them in action, or give them any molestation (v. 23): The land rested from war. It ended
not in a peace with the Canaanites (that was forbidden), but in a peace from them. There
is a rest, a rest from war, remaining for the people of God, into which they shall enter when
their warfare is accomplished.
II. That which was now done is here compared with that which had been said to Moses.
God's word and his works, if viewed and considered together, will mutually illustrate each
other. It is here observed in the close, 1. That all the precepts God had given to Moses relating
to the conquest of Canaan were obeyed on the people's part, at least while Joshua lived. See
how solemnly this is remarked (v. 15): As the Lord commanded Moses his servant, by whose
hand the law was given, so did Moses command Joshua, for Moses was faithful, as a law-
giver, to him that appointed him; he did his part, and then he died: but were the commands
of Moses observed when he was in his grave? Yes, they were: So did Joshua, who was, in his
place, as faithful as Moses in his. He left nothing undone (Heb. he removed nothing) of all
that the Lord commanded Moses. Those that leave their duty undone do what they can to
remove or make void the command of God, by which they are bound to do it; but Joshua,
by performing the precept, confirmed it, as the expression is, Deut. xxvii. 26. Joshua was
himself a great commander, and yet nothing was more his praise than his obedience. Those
that rule others at their will must themselves be ruled by the divine will; then their power
is indeed their honour, and not otherwise. The pious obedience for which Joshua is here
commended respects especially the command to destroy the Canaanites, and to break down
their altars and burn their images, Deut. vii. 2-5; Exod. xxiii. 24; xxxiv. 13. Joshua, in his zeal
124
Chapter XI
for the Lord of hosts, spared neither the idols nor the idolaters. Saul's disobedience, or rather
his partial obedience, to the command of God, for the utter destruction of the Amalekites,
cost him his kingdom. It should seem Joshua himself gives this account of his most careful
and punctual observance of his orders in the execution of his commission, that in all respects
he had done as Moses commanded him; and then it intimates that he had more pleasure
and satisfaction in reflecting upon his obedience to the commands of God in all this war,
and valued himself more upon that, than upon all the gains and triumphs with which he
was enriched and advanced. 2. That all the promises God had given to Moses relating to
this conquest were accomplished on his part, v. 23. Joshua took the whole land, conquered
it, and took possession of it, according to all that the Lord said unto Moses. God had promised
to drive out the nations before them (Exod. xxxiii. 2; xxxiv. 11), and to bring them down,
Deut. ix. 3. And now it was done. There failed not one word of the promise. Our successes
and enjoyments are then doubly sweet and comfortable to us when we see them flowing to
us from the promise (this is according to what the Lord said), as our obedience is then ac-
ceptable to God when it has an eye to the precept. And, if we make conscience of our duty,
we need not question the performance of the promise.
125
