Chapter XVIII
Chapter XVIII
J O S H U A
CHAP. XVIII.
In this chapter we have, I. The setting up of the tabernacle at Shiloh, ver. 1. II. The stirring
up of the seven tribes that were yet unsettled to look after their lot, and the putting of them
in a method for it, by Joshua, ver. 2-7. III. The distributing of the land into seven lots, by
certain men employed for that purpose, ver. 8, 9. IV. The determining of these seven portions
to the seven tribes yet unprovided for by lot, ver. 10. V. The particular lot of the tribe of
Benjamin, the borders of it, ver. 11-20. And the cities contained in it, ver. 21-28. The other
six tribes we shall find well provided for in the next chapter.
The Tabernacle at Shiloh. (b. c. 1444.)
1 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh,
and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before them.
In the midst of the story of the dividing of the land comes in this account of the setting
up of the tabernacle, which had hitherto continued in its old place in the centre of their
camp; but now that three of the four squadrons that used to surround it in the wilderness
were broken and diminished, those of Judah, Ephraim, and Reuben, by the removal of those
tribes to their respective possessions, and that of Dan only remained entire, it was time to
think of removing the tabernacle itself into a city. Many a time the priests and Levites had
taken it down, carried it, and set it up again in the wilderness, according to the directions
given them (Num. iv. 5, &c.); but now they must do it for good and all, not one of the stakes
thereof must any more be removed, nor any of the cords thereof broken, Isa. xxxiii. 20.
Observe,
I. The place to which the tabernacle was removed, and in which it was set up. It was
Shiloh, a city in the lot of Ephraim, but lying close upon the lot of Benjamin. Doubtless God
himself did some way or other direct them to this place, for he had promised to choose the
place where he would make his name to dwell, Deut. xii. 11. It is most probable God made
known his mind in this matter by the judgment of Urim. This place was pitched upon, 1.
Because it was in the heart of the country, nearer the centre than Jerusalem was, and therefore
the more convenient for the meeting of all Israel there from the several parts of the country;
it had been in the midst of their camp in the wilderness, and therefore must now be in the
midst of their nation, as that which sanctified the whole, and was the glory in the midst of
them. See Ps. xlvi. 5. 2. Because it was in the lot of that tribe of which Joshua was, who was
now their chief magistrate, and it would be both for his honour and convenience and for
the advantage of the country to have it near him. The testimony of Israel and the thrones
of judgment do well together, Ps. cxxii. 4, 5. 3. Some think there was an eye to the name of
the place, Shiloh being the name by which the Messiah was known in dying Jacob's prophecy
(Gen. xlix. 10), which prophecy, no doubt, was well known among the Jews; the setting up
159
Chapter XVIII
of the tabernacle in Shiloh gave them a hint that in that Shiloh whom Jacob spoke of all the
ordinances of this worldly sanctuary should have their accomplishment in a greater and
more perfect tabernacle, Heb. ix. 1, 11. And Dr. Lightfoot thinks that the place where the
tabernacle was set up was therefore called Shiloh, because of the peaceableness of the land
at this time; as afterwards in Salem was his temple, which also signifies peaceable.
II. The solemn manner of doing it: The whole congregation assembled together to attend
the solemnity, to do honour to the ark of God, as the token of his presence, and to bid it
welcome to its settlement. Every Israelite was interested in it, and therefore all testified their
joy and satisfaction upon this occasion. See 2 Sam. vi. 15. It is probable those tribes that
were yet encamped when the tabernacle was removed to Shiloh decamped from Gilgal and
pitched about Shiloh, for every true Israelite will desire to fix where God's tabernacle fixed.
Mention is made, on this occasion, of the land being subdued before them, to intimate that
the country, hereabouts at least, being thoroughly reduced, they met with no opposition,
nor were they apprehensive of any danger, but thought it time to make this grateful acknow-
ledgment of God's goodness to them in the constant series of successes with which he had
blessed them. It was a good presage of a comfortable settlement to themselves in Canaan,
when their first care was to see the ark well settled as soon as they had a safe place ready to
settle it in. Here the ark continued about 300 years, till the sins of Eli's house forfeited the
ark, lost it and ruined Shiloh, and its ruins were long after made use of as warnings to Jeru-
salem. Go, see what I did to Shiloh, Jer. vii. 12; Ps. lxxviii. 60.
Joshua Reproves the Unsettled Tribes. (b. c. 1444.)
  2 And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet
received their inheritance.   3 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the Lord God of your fathers hath given you?   4 Give
out from among you three men for each tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and
go through the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they shall
come again to me.   5 And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in their
coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their coasts on the north.   6 Ye
shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the description hither to me,
that I may cast lots for you here before the Lord our God.   7 But the Levites have no part
among you; for the priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and
half the tribe of Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east, which
Moses the servant of the Lord gave them.   8 And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua
charged them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and
describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you before the Lord in Shiloh.
  9 And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven
parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh.   10 And Joshua cast lots for
160
Chapter XVIII
them in Shiloh before the Lord: and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel
according to their divisions.
Here, I. Joshua reproves those tribes which were yet unsettled that they did not bestir
themselves to gain a settlement in the land which God had given them. Seven tribes were
yet unprovided for, though sure of an inheritance, yet uncertain where it should be, and it
seems in no great care about it, v. 2. And with them Joshua reasons (v. 3): How long are you
slack? 1. They were too well pleased with their present condition, liked well enough to live
in a body together, the more the merrier, and, like the Babel-builders, had no mind to be
scattered abroad and break good company. The spoil of the cities they had taken served
them to live plentifully upon for the present, and they banished the thoughts of time to
come. Perhaps the tribes of Judah and Joseph, who had already received their inheritance
in the countries next adjoining, were generous in entertaining their brethren who were yet
unprovided for, so that they went from one good house to another among their friends,
with which, instead of grudging that they were postponed, they were so well pleased that
they cared not for going to houses of their own. 2. They were slothful and dilatory. It may
be they wished the thing done, but had not spirit to stir in it, or move towards the doing of
it, though it was so much for their own advantage; like the sluggard, that hides his hand in
his bosom, and it grieves him to bring it to his mouth again. The countries that remained to
be divided lay at a distance, and some parts of them in the hands of the Canaanites. If they
go to take possession of them, the cities must be rebuilt or repaired, they must drive their
flocks and herds a great way, and carry their wives and children to strange places, and this
will not be done without care and pains, and breaking through some hardships; thus he that
observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds shall not reap, Eccl. xi. 4. Note,
Many are diverted from real duties, and debarred from real comforts, by seeming difficulties.
God by his grace has given us a title to a good land, the heavenly Canaan, but we are slack
to take possession; we enter not into that rest, as we might by faith, and hope, and holy joy;
we live not in heaven, as we might by setting our affections on things above and having our
conversation there. How long shall it be thus with us? How long shall we thus stand in our
own light, and forsake our own mercies for lying vanities? Joshua was sensible of the incon-
veniences of this delay, that, while they neglected to take possession of the land that was
conquered, the Canaanites were recovering strength and spirit, and fortifying themselves
in the places that were yet in their hands, which would make the total expulsion of them
the more difficult. They would lose their advantages by not following their blow; and
therefore, as an eagle stirreth up her nest, so Joshua stirs them up to take possession of their
lot. He is ready to do his part, if they will but do theirs.
II. He puts them in a way to settle themselves.
1. The land that remained must be surveyed, an account taken of the cities, and the
territories belonging to them, v. 4. These must be divided into seven equal parts, as near as
161
Chapter XVIII
they could guess at their true value, which they must have an eye to, and not merely to the
number of the cities and extent of the country. Judah is fixed on the south and Joseph on
the north of Shiloh, to protect the tabernacle (v. 5), and therefore they need not describe
their country, but those countries only that were yet undisposed of. He gives a reason (v. 7)
why they must divide it into seven parts only, because the Levites were to have no temporal
estate (as we say), but their benefices only, which were entailed upon their families: The
priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance, and a very honourable, comfortable, plentiful in-
heritance it was. Gad and Reuben, with half of the tribe of Manasseh, were already fixed,
and needed not to have any further care taken of them. Now, (1.) The surveyors were three
men out of each of the seven tribes that were to be provided for (v. 4), one-and-twenty in
all, who perhaps for greater expedition, because they had already lost time, divided themselves
into three companies, one of each tribe in each company, and took each their district to
survey. The matter was thus referred equally, that there might be neither any partiality used
in making up the seven lots, nor any shadow of suspicion given, but all might be satisfied
that they had right done them. (2.) The survey was accordingly made, and brought in to
Joshua, v. 8, 9. Josephus says it was seven months in the doing. And we must in it observe,
[1.] The faith and courage of the persons employed: abundance of Canaanites remained in
the land, and all raging against Israel, as a bear robbed of her whelps; the business of these
surveyors would soon be known, and what could they expect but to be way-laid, and have
their brains knocked out by the fierce observers? But in obedience to Joshua's command,
and in dependence upon God's power, they thus put their lives in their hands to serve their
country. [2.] The good providence of God in protecting them from the many deaths they
were exposed to, and bringing them all safely again to the host at Shiloh. When we are in
the way of our duty we are under the special protection of the Almighty.
2. When it was surveyed, and reduced to seven lots, then Joshua would, by appeal to
God, and direction from him, determine which of these lots should belong to each tribe (v.
6): That I may cast lots for you here at the tabernacle (because it was a sacred transaction)
before the Lord our God, to whom each tribe must have an eye, with thankfulness for the
conveniences and submission to the inconveniences of their allotment. What we have in
the world we must acknowledge God's property in, and dispose of it as before him, with
justice, and charity, and dependence upon Providence. The heavenly Canaan is described
to us in a book, the book of the scriptures, and there are in it mansions and portions sufficient
for all God's spiritual Israel. Christ is our Joshua that divides it to us. On him we must attend,
and to him we must apply for an inheritance with the saints in light. See John xvii. 2, 3.
The Lot of Benjamin. (b. c. 1444.)
  11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their
families: and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children
of Joseph.   12 And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border went up
162
Chapter XVIII
to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and
the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Beth-aven.   13 And the border went over
from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is Beth-el, southward; and the border
descended to Ataroth-adar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Beth-
horon.   14 And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea southward,
from the hill that lieth before Beth-horon southward; and the goings out thereof were at
Kirjath-baal, which is Kirjath-jearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west quarter.
  15 And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjath-jearim, and the border went out on
the west, and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah:   16 And the border came down
to the end of the mountain that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is
in the valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of Hinnom, to the side
of Jebusi on the south, and descended to En-rogel,   17 And was drawn from the north, and
went forth to En-shemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going
up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,   18 And passed
along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and went down unto Arabah:   19
And the border passed along to the side of Beth-hoglah northward: and the outgoings of
the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the south
coast.   20 And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the
children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.   21
Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were
Jericho, and Beth-hoglah, and the valley of Keziz,   22 And Beth-arabah, and Zemaraim,
and Beth-el,   23 And Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah,   24 And Chephar-haammonai, and
Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:   25 Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,  
26 And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,   27 And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,   28
And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with
their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.
We have here the lot of the tribe of Benjamin, which Providence cast next to Joseph on
the one hand, because Benjamin was own and only brother to Joseph, and was little Benjamin
(Ps. lxviii. 27), that needed the protection of great Joseph, and yet had a better protector,
for the Lord shall cover him all the day long, Deut. xxxiii. 12. And it was next to Judah on
the other hand, that this tribe might hereafter unite with Judah in an adherence to the throne
of David and the temple at Jerusalem. Here we have, 1. The exact borders and limits of this
tribe, which we need not be exact in the explication of. As it had Judah on the south and
Joseph on the north, so it had Jordan on the east and Dan on the west. The western border
is said to compass the corner of the sea southward (v. 14), whereas no part of the lot of this
tribe came near to the great sea. Bishop Patrick thinks the meaning is that it ran along in a
parallel line to the great sea, though at a distance. Dr. Fuller suggests that since it is not
called the great sea, but only the sea, which often signifies any lake or mere, it may be meant
163
Chapter XVIII
of the pool of Gibeon, which may be called a corner or canton of the sea; it is called the great
waters of Gibeon (Jer. xli. 12), and it is compassed by the western border of this tribe. 2. The
particular cities in this tribe, not all, but the most considerable. Twenty-six are here named.
Jericho is put first, though dismantled, and forbidden to be rebuilt as a city with gates and
walls, because it might be built and inhabited as a country village, and so was not useless to
this tribe. Gilgal, where Israel first encamped when Saul was made king (1 Sam. xi. 15), was
in this tribe. It was afterwards a very profane place. Hos. ix. 15, All their wickedness is in
Gilgal. Beth-el was in this tribe, a famous place. Though Benjamin adhered to the house of
David, yet Beth-el, it seems, was in the possession of the house of Joseph (Judg. i. 23-25),
and there Jeroboam set up one of his calves. In this tribe was Gibeon, where the altar was
in the beginning of Solomon's time, 2 Chron. i. 3. Gibeah likewise, that infamous place
where the Levite's concubine was abused. Mizpeh, and near it Samuel's Ebenezer, and also
Anathoth, Jeremiah's city, were in this tribe, as was the northern part of Jerusalem. Paul was
the honour of this tribe (Rom. xi. 1; Phil. iii. 5); but where his land lay we know not: he
sought the better country.
164
