Chapter XIX
Chapter XIX
J O S H U A
CHAP. XIX.
In the description of the lots of Judah and Benjamin we have an account both of the
borders that surrounded them and of the cities contained in them. In that of Ephraim and
Manasseh we have the borders, but not the cities; in this chapter Simeon and Dan are de-
scribed by their cities only, and not their borders, because they lay very much within Judah,
especially the former; the rest have both their borders described and their cities names, es-
pecially frontiers. Here is, I. The lot of Simeon, ver. 1-9. II. Of Zebulun, ver. 10-16. III. Of
Issachar, ver. 17-23. IV. Of Asher, ver. 24-31. V. Of Naphtali, ver. 32-39. VI. Of Dan, ver.
40-48. Lastly, The inheritance assigned to Joshua himself and his own family, ver. 49-51.
The Lot of Simeon. (b. c. 1444.)
1 And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of Simeon
according to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children
of Judah.   2 And they had in their inheritance Beer-sheba, or Sheba, and Moladah,   3 And
Hazar-shual, and Balah, and Azem,   4 And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,   5 And Ziklag,
and Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susah,   6 And Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities
and their villages:   7 Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:   8
And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalath-beer, Ramath of the south.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.   9
Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon:
for the part of the children of Judah was too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon
had their inheritance within the inheritance of them.
Simeon's lot was drawn after Judah's, Joseph's, and Benjamin's, because Jacob had put
that tribe under disgrace; yet it is put before the two younger sons of Leah and the three
sons of the handmaids. Not one person of note, neither judge nor prophet, was of this tribe,
that we know of.
I. The situation of their lot was within that of Judah (v. 1) and was taken from it, v. 9.
It seems, those that first surveyed the land thought it larger than it was, and that it would
have held out to give every tribe in proportion as large a share as they had carved out for
Judah; but, upon a more strict enquiry, it was found that it would not reach (v. 9): The part
of the children of Judah was too much for them, more than they needed, and more, as it
proved, than fell to their share. Yet God did not by the lot lessen it, but left it to their prudence
and care afterwards to discover and rectify the mistake, which when they did, 1. The men
of Judah did not oppose the taking away of the cities again, which by the first distribution
fell within their border, when they were convinced that they had more than their proportion.
In all such cases errors must be excepted and a review admitted if there be occasion. Though,
in strictness, what fell to their lot was their right against all the world, yet they would not
165
Chapter XIX
insist upon it when it appeared that another tribe would want what they had to spare. Note,
We must look on the things of others, and not on our own only. The abundance of some
must supply the wants of others, that there may be somewhat of an equality, for which there
may be equity where there is not law. 2. That which was thus taken off from Judah to be put
into a new lot Providence directed to the tribe of Simeon, that Jacob's prophecy concerning
this tribe might be fulfilled, I will divide them in Jacob. The cities of Simeon were scattered
in Judah, with which tribe they were surrounded, except on that side towards the sea. This
brought them into a confederacy with the tribe of Judah (Judg. i. 3), and afterwards was a
happy occasion of the adherence of many of this tribe to the house of David, at the time of
the revolt of the ten tribes to Jeroboam. 2 Chron. xv. 9, out of Simeon they fell to Asa in
abundance. It is good being in a good neighbourhood.
II. The cities within their lot are here named. Beersheba, or Sheba, for these names seem
to refer to the same place, is put first. Ziklag, which we read of in David's story, is one of
them. What course they took to enlarge their borders and make room for themselves we
find 1 Chron. iv. 39, &c.
The Lot of Zebulun. (b. c. 1444.)
10 And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families:
and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:   11 And their border went up toward
the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before
Jokneam;   12 And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of
Chisloth-tabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia,   13 And from
thence passeth on along on the east to Gittah-hepher, to Ittah-kazin, and goeth out to
Remmon-methoar to Neah;   14 And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hanna-
thon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthah-el:   15 And Kattath, and Na-
hallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Beth-lehem: twelve cities with their villages.   16 This
is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with
their villages.
This is the lot of Zebulun, who, though born of Leah after Issachar, yet was blessed by
Jacob and Moses before him; and therefore it was so ordered that his lot was drawn before
that of Issachar, north of which it lay and south of Asher. 1. The lot of this tribe was washed
by the great sea on the west, and by the sea of Tiberias on the east, answering Jacob's
prophecy (Gen. xlix. 13), Zebulun shall be a haven of ships, trading ships on the great sea
and fishing ships on the sea of Galilee. 2. Though there were some places in this tribe which
were made famous in the Old Testament, especially Mount Carmel, on which the famous
trial was between God and Baal in Elijah's time, yet it was made much more illustrious in
the New Testament; for within the lot of this tribe was Nazareth, where our blessed Saviour
spent so much of his time on earth, and from which he was called Jesus of Nazareth, and
166
Chapter XIX
Mount Tabor on which he was transfigured, and that coast of the sea of Galilee on which
Christ preached so many sermons and wrought so many miracles.
The Lot of Issachar. (b. c. 1444.)
17 And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of Issachar according to
their families.   18 And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,   19
And Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath,   20 And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,   21
And Remeth, and En-gannim, and En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez;   22 And the coast reacheth
to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Beth-shemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at
Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.   23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages.
The lot of Issachar ran from Jordan in the east to the great sea in the west, Manasseh
on the south, and Zebulun on the north. A numerous tribe, Num. xxvi. 25. Tola, one of the
judges, was of this tribe, Judg. x. 1. So was Baasha, one of the kings of Israel, 1 Kings xv. 27.
The most considerable places in this tribe were, 1. Jezreel, in which was Ahab's palace, and
near it Naboth's vineyard. 2. Shunem, where lived that good Shunamite that entertained
Elisha. 3. The river Kishon, on the banks of which, in this tribe, Sisera was beaten by Deborah
and Barak. 4. The mountains of Gilboa, on which Saul and Jonathan were slain, which were
not far from Endor, where Saul consulted the witch. 5. The valley of Megiddo, where Josiah
was slain near Hadad-rimmon, 2 Kings xxiii. 29; Zech. xii. 11.
The Lot of Asher. (b. c. 1444.)
24 And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their
families.   25 And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,   26 And
Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihor-
libnath;   27 And turneth toward the sunrising to Beth-dagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and
to the valley of Jiphthah-el toward the north side of Beth-emek, and Neiel, and goeth out
to Cabul on the left hand,   28 And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even
unto great Zidon;   29 And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre;
and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to
Achzib:   30 Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.
  31 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families,
these cities with their villages.
The lot of Asher lay upon the coast of the great sea. We read not of any famous person
of this tribe but Anna the prophetess, who was a constant resident in the temple at the time
of our Saviour's birth, Luke ii. 36. Nor were there many famous places in this tribe. Aphek
(mentioned v. 30) was the place near which Benhadad was beaten by Ahad, 1 Kings xx. 30.
But close adjoining to this tribe were the celebrated sea-port towns of Tyre and Sidon, which
we read so much of. Tyre is called here that strong city (v. 29), but Bishop Patrick thinks it
167
Chapter XIX
was not the same Tyre that we read of afterwards, for that was built on an island; this old
strong city was on the continent. And it is conjectured by some that into these two strong-
holds, Sidon and Tzor, or Tyre, many of the people of Canaan fled and took shelter when
Joshua invaded them.
The Lot of Naphtali. (b. c. 1444.)
32 The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali
according to their families.   33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim,
and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:  
34 And then the coast turneth westward to Aznoth-tabor, and goeth out from thence to
Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side,
and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.   35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer,
and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,   36 And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,   37
And Kedesh, and Edrei, and En-hazor,   38 And Iron, and Migdal-el, Horem, and Beth-
anath, and Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.   39 This is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the cities and their villages.
Naphtali lay furthest north of all the tribes, bordering on Mount Libanus. The city of
Leshem, or Liash, lay on the utmost edge of it to the north, and therefore when the Danites
had made themselves masters of it, and called it Dan, the length of Canaan from north to
south was reckoned from Dan to Beersheba. It had Zebulun on the south, Asher on the west,
and Judah upon Jordan, probably a city of that name, and so distinguished from the tribe
of Judah on the east. It was in the lot of this tribe, near the waters of Merom, that Joshua
fought and routed Jabin, ch. xi. 1. &c. In this tribe stood Capernaum and Bethsaida, on the
north end of the sea of Tiberias, in which Christ did so many mighty works; and the
mountain (as is supposed) on which Christ preached, Matt. v. 1.
The Lot of Dan. (b. c. 1444.)
40 And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their
families.   41 And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir-shemesh,  
42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,   43 And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,  
44 And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,   45 And Jehud, and Bene-berak, and Gath-
rimmon,   46 And Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.   47 And the coast
of the children of Dan went out too little for them: therefore the children of Dan went up
to fight against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed
it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.   48 This
is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these cities
with their villages.
Dan, though commander of one of the four squadrons of the camp of Israel, in the
wilderness, that which brought up the rear, yet was last provided for in Canaan, and his lot
168
Chapter XIX
fell in the southern part of Canaan, between Judah on the east and the land of the Philistines
on the west, Ephraim on the north and Simeon on the south. Providence ordered this nu-
merous and powerful tribe into a post of danger, as best able to deal with those vexatious
neighbours the Philistines, and so it was found in Samson. Here is an account, 1. Of what
fell to this tribe by lot, Zorah, and Eshtaol, and the camp of Dan thereabouts, of which we
read in the story of Samson. And near there was the valley of Eshcol, whence the spies
brought the famous bunch of grapes. Japho, or Joppa was in this lot. 2. Of what they got by
their own industry and valour, which is mentioned here (v. 47), but related at large, Judg.
xviii. 7, &c.
The Inheritance of Joshua. (b. c. 1444.)
49 When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the
children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them:   50 According
to the word of the Lord they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath-serah in mount
Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.   51 These are the inheritances, which
Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of
the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the Lord, at the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end of dividing the country.
Before this account of the dividing of the land is solemnly closed up, in the last verse,
which intimates that the thing was done to the satisfaction of all, here is an account of the
particular inheritance assigned to Joshua. 1. He was last served, though the eldest and greatest
man of all Israel, and who, having commanded in the conquest of Canaan, might have de-
manded the first settlement in it for himself and his family. But he would make it to appear
that in all he did he sought the good of his country, and not any private interest of his own.
He was content to be unfixed till he saw them all settled; and herein is a great example to
all in public places to prefer the common welfare before their particular satisfaction. Let the
public be first served. 2. He had his lot according to the word of the Lord. It is probable that,
when God by Moses told Caleb what inheritance he should have (ch. xiv. 9), he gave the like
promise to Joshua, which he had an eye to in making his election: this made his portion
doubly pleasant, that he had it, not as the rest by common providence, but by special
promise. 3. He chose it in Mount Ephraim, which belonged to his own tribe, with which he
thereby put himself in common, when he might by prerogative have chosen his inheritance
in some other tribe, as suppose that of Judah, and thereby have distinguished himself from
them. Let no man's preferment or honour make him ashamed of his family or country, or
estrange him from it. The tabernacle was set up in the lot of Ephraim, and Joshua would
forecast not to be far from that. 4. The children of Israel are said to give it to him (v. 49),
which bespeaks his humility, that he would not take it to himself without the people's consent
and approbation, as if he would thereby own himself, though major singulis—greater than
any one, yet minor universis—less than the whole assemblage, and would hold even the estate
169
Chapter XIX
of his family, under God, by the grant of the people. 5. It was a city that must be built before
it was fit to be dwelt in. While others dwelt in houses which they built not, Joshua must
erect for himself (that he might be a pattern of industry and contentment with mean things)
such buildings as he could hastily run up, without curiosity or magnificence. Our Lord Jesus
thus came and dwelt among us, not in pomp but poverty, providing rest for us, yet himself
not having where to lay his head. Even Christ pleased not himself.
170
