Chapter XXI
Chapter XXI
J O S H U A
CHAP. XXI.
It had been often said that the tribe of Levi should have "no inheritance with their
brethren," no particular part of the country assigned them, as the other tribes had, no, not
the country about Shiloh, which one might have expected to be appropriated to them as the
lands of the church; but, though they were not thus cast into a country by themselves, it
appears, by the provision made for them in this chapter, that they were no losers, but the
rest of the tribes were very much gainers, by their being dispersed. We have here, I. The
motion they made to have their cities assigned them, according to God's appointment, ver.
1, 2. II. The nomination of the cities accordingly out of the several tribes, and the distribution
of them to the respective families of this tribe, ver. 3-8. III. A catalogue of the cities, forty-
eight in all, ver. 9-42. IV. A receipt entered in full of all that God had promised to his people
Israel, ver. 43-45.
The Cities of the Levites. (b. c. 1444.)
1 Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and
unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children
of Israel;   2 And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The Lord
commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for
our cattle.   3 And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, at the
commandment of the Lord, these cities and their suburbs.   4 And the lot came out for the
families of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites,
had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of
Benjamin, thirteen cities.   5 And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the
families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of
Manasseh, ten cities.   6 And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of
the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.   7 The children of Merari by their
families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of
Zebulun, twelve cities.   8 And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities
with their suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.
Here is, I. The Levites' petition presented to this general convention of the states, now
sitting at Shiloh, v. 1, 2. Observe, 1. They had not their lot assigned them till they made their
claim. There is an inheritance provided for all the saints, that royal priesthood, but then
they must petition for it. Ask, and it shall be given you. Joshua had quickened the rest of the
tribes who were slack to put in their claims, but the Levites, it may be supposed, knew their
duty and interest better than the rest, and were therefore forward in this matter, when it
came to their turn, without being called upon. They build their claim upon a very good
174
Chapter XXI
foundation, not their own merits nor services, but the divine precept: "The Lord commanded
by the hand of Moses to give us cities, commanded you to grant them, which implied a
command to us to ask them." Note, The maintenance of ministers is not an arbitrary thing,
left purely to the good-will of the people, who may let them starve if they please; no, as the
God of Israel commanded that the Levites should be well provided for, so has the Lord Jesus,
the King of the Christian church, ordained, and a perpetual ordinance it is that those who
preach the gospel should live of the gospel (1 Cor. ix. 14), and should live comfortably. 2. They
did not make their claim till all the rest of the tribes were provided for, and then they did it
immediately. There was some reason for it; every tribe must first know their own, else they
would not know what they gave the Levites, and so it could not be such a reasonable service
as it ought to be. But it is also an instance of their humility, modesty, and patience (and
Levites should be examples of these and other virtues), that they were willing to be served
last, and they fared never the worse for it. Let not God's ministers complain if at any time
they find themselves postponed in men's thoughts and cares, but let them make sure of the
favour of God and the honour that comes from him, and then they may well enough afford
to bear the slights and neglects of men.
II. The Levites' petition granted immediately, without any dispute, the princes of Israel
being perhaps ashamed that they needed to be called upon in this matter, and that the motion
had not been made among themselves for the settling of the Levites. 1. The children of Israel
are said to give the cities for the Levites. God had appointed how many they should be in
all, forty-eight. It is probable that Joshua and the princes, upon consideration of the extent
and value of the lot of each tribe as it was laid before them, had appointed how many cities
should be taken out of each; and then the fathers of the several tribes themselves agreed
which they should be, and therefore are said to give them, as an offering, to the Lord; so
God had appointed. Num. xxxv. 8, Every one shall give of his cities to the Levites. Here God
tried their generosity, and it was found to praise and honour, for it appears by the following
catalogue that the cities they gave to the Levites were generally some of the best and most
considerable in each tribe. And it is probable that they had an eye to the situation of them,
taking care they should be so dispersed as that no part of the country should be too far distant
from a Levites' city. 2. They gave them at the commandment of the Lord, that is, with an eye
to the command and in obedience to it, which was it that sanctified the grant. They gave
the number that God commanded, and it was well this matter was settled that the Levites
might not ask more nor the Israelites offer less. They gave them also with their suburbs, or
glebe-lands, belonging to them, so many cubits by measure from the walls of the city, as
God had commanded (Num. xxxv. 4, 5), and did not go about to cut them short. 3. When
the forty-eight cities were pitched upon, they were divided into four lots, as they lay next
together, and then by lot were determined to the four several families of the tribe of Levi.
When the Israelites had surrendered the cities into the hand of God, he would himself have
175
Chapter XXI
the distributing of them among his servants. (1.) The family of Aaron, who were the only
priests, had for their share the thirteen cities that were given by the tribes of Judah, Simeon,
and Benjamin, v. 4. God in wisdom ordered it thus, that though Jerusalem itself was not
one of their cities, it being as yet in the possession of the Jebusites (and those generous tribes
would not mock the Levites, who had another warfare to mind, with a city that must be re-
covered by the sword before it could be enjoyed), yet the cities that fell to their lot were
those which lay next to Jerusalem, because that was to be, in process of time, the holy city,
where their business would chiefly lie. (2.) The Kohathite-Levites (among whom were the
posterity of Moses, though never distinguished from them) had the cities that lay in the lot
of Dan, which lay next to Judah, and in that of Ephraim, and the half-tribe of Manasseh,
which lay next to Benjamin. So those who descended from Aaron's father joined nearest to
Aaron's sons. (3.) Gershon was the eldest son of Levi, and therefore, though the younger
house of the Kohathites was preferred before his, yet his children had the precedency of the
other family of Merari, v. 6. (4.) The Merarites, the youngest house, had their lot last, and
it lay furthest off, v. 7. The rest of the sons of Jacob had a lot for every tribe only, but Levi,
God's tribe, had a lot for each of its families; for there is a particular providence directing
and attending the removals and settlements of ministers, and appointing where those shall
fix who are to be the lights of the world.
9 And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the
children of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name,   10 Which the children
of Aaron, being of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for
theirs was the first lot.   11 And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which
city is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it.   12 But
the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for
his possession.   13 Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs,   14 And Jattir
with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs,   15 And Holon with her suburbs, and
Debir with her suburbs,   16 And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and
Beth-shemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.   17 And out of the tribe
of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs,   18 Anathoth with her
suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.   19 All the cities of the children of Aaron,
the priests, were thirteen cities with their suburbs.   20 And the families of the children of
Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of
their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.   21 For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in
mount Ephraim, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs,   22 And
Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Beth-horon with her suburbs; four cities.   23 And out of
the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her suburbs,   24 Aijalon with
her suburbs, Gath-rimmon with her suburbs; four cities.   25 And out of the half tribe of
176
Chapter XXI
Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gath-rimmon with her suburbs; two cities.   26
All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that re-
mained.   27 And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the
other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of
refuge for the slayer; and Beesh-terah with her suburbs; two cities.   28 And out of the tribe
of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,   29 Jarmuth with her
suburbs, En-gannim with her suburbs; four cities.   30 And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal
with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,   31 Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with
her suburbs; four cities.   32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammoth-dor with her suburbs, and Kartan
with her suburbs; three cities.   33 All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families
were thirteen cities with their suburbs.   34 And unto the families of the children of Merari,
the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah
with her suburbs,   35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.   36
And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs,   37
Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.   38 And out of
the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and
Mahanaim with her suburbs,   39 Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four
cities in all.   40 So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families, which were re-
maining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot twelve cities.   41 All the cities of the
Levites within the possession of the children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their
suburbs.   42 These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them: thus were
all these cities.
We have here a particular account of the cities which were given to the children of Levi
out of the several tribes, not only to be occupied and inhabited by them, as tenants to the
several tribes in which they lay—no, their interest in them was not dependent and precarious,
but to be owned and possessed by them as lords and proprietors, and as having the same
title to them that the rest of the tribes had to their cities or lands, as appears by the law which
preserved the house in the Levites' cities from being alienated any longer than till the year
of jubilee, Lev. xxv. 32, 33. Yet it is probable that the Levites having only the cities and sub-
urbs, while the land about pertained to the tribes in which they lay, those of that tribe, for
the convenience of occupying that land, might commonly rent houses of the Levites, as they
could spare them in their cities, and so live among them as their tenants. Several things may
be observed in this account, besides what was observed in the law concerning it, Num. xxxv.
I. That the Levites were dispersed into all the tribes, and not suffered to live all together
in any one part of the country. This would find them all with work, and employ them all
for the good of others; for ministers, of all people, must neither be idle nor live to themselves
or to one another only. Christ left his twelve disciples together in a body, but left orders that
177
Chapter XXI
they should in due time disperse themselves, that they might preach the gospel to every
creature. The mixing of the Levites thus with the other tribes would be an obligation upon
them to walk circumspectly, and as became their sacred function, and to avoid every thing
that might disgrace it. Had they lived all together, they would have been tempted to wink
at one another's faults, and to excuse one another when they did amiss; but by this means
they were made to see the eyes of all Israel upon them, and therefore saw it their concern
to walk so as that their ministry might in nothing be blamed nor their high character suffer
by their ill carriage.
II. That every tribe of Israel was adorned and enriched with its share of Levites' cities
in proportion to its compass, even those that lay most remote. They were all God's people,
and therefore they all had Levites among them. 1. To show kindness to, as God appointed
them, Deut. xii. 19; xiv. 29. They were God's receivers, to whom the people might give their
grateful acknowledgments of God's goodness, as the occasion and disposition were. 2. To
receive advice and instruction from; when they could not go up to the tabernacle, to consult
those who attended there, they might go to a Levites' city, and be taught the good knowledge
of the Lord. Thus God set up a candle in every room of his house, to give light to all his
family; as those that attended the altar kept the charge of the Lord, to see that no divine ap-
pointment was neglected there, so those that were scattered in the country had their charge
too, which was to see that no idolatrous superstitious usages were introduced at a distance
and to watch for the souls of God's Israel. Thus did God graciously provide for the keeping
up of religion among them, and that they might have the word nigh them; yet, blessed be
God, we, under the gospel, have it yet nigher, not only Levites in every county, but Levites
in every parish, whose office it is still to teach the people knowledge, and to go before them
in the things of God.
III. That there were thirteen cities, and those some of the best, appointed for the priests,
the sons of Aaron, v. 19. Aaron left but two sons, Eleazar and Ithamar, yet his family was
now so much increased, and it was foreseen that it would in process of time grow so numer-
ous, as to replenish all these cities, though a considerable number must of necessity be res-
ident wherever the ark and the altar were. We read in both Testaments of such numbers of
priests that we may suppose none of all the families of Israel that came out of Egypt increased
afterwards so much as that of Aaron did; and the promise afterwards to the house of Aaron
is, God shall increase you more and more, you and your children, Ps. cxv. 12, 14. He will raise
up a seed to serve him.
IV. That some of the Levites' cities were afterwards famous upon other accounts. Hebron
was the city in which David began his reign, and in Manhanaim, another Levites' city (v.
38), he lay, and had his headquarters when he fled from Absalom. The first Israelite that
ever wore the title of king (namely, Abimelech, the son of Gideon) reigned in Shechem,
another Levites' city, v. 21.
178
Chapter XXI
V. That the number of them in all was more than of most of the tribes, except Judah,
though the tribe of Levi was one of the least of the tribes, to show how liberal God is, and
his people should be, to his ministers; yet the disproportion will not appear so great as at
first it seems, if we consider that the Levites had cities only with their suburbs to dwell in,
but the rest of the tribes, besides their cities (and those perhaps were many more than are
named in the account of their lot), had many unwalled towns and villages which they inhab-
ited, besides country houses.
Upon the whole, it appears that effectual care was taken that the Levites should live both
comfortably and usefully: and those, whether ministers or others, for whom Providence has
done well, must look upon themselves as obliged thereby to do good, and, according as their
capacity and opportunity are, to serve their generation.
43 And the Lord gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give unto their fathers;
and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.   44 And the Lord gave them rest round about, ac-
cording to all that he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their enemies
before them; the Lord delivered all their enemies into their hand.   45 There failed not ought
of any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.
We have here the conclusion of this whole matter, the foregoing history summed up,
and, to make it appear the more bright, compared with the promise of which it was the full
accomplishment. God's word and his works mutually illustrate each other. The performance
makes the promise appear very true and the promise makes the performance appear very
kind.
I. God had promised to give the seed of Abraham the land of Canaan for a possession,
and now at last he performed this promise (v. 43): They possessed it, and dwelt therein.
Though they had often forfeited the benefit of that promise, and God had long delayed the
performance of it, yet at last all difficulties were conquered, and Canaan was their own. And
the promise of the heavenly Canaan is as sure to all God's spiritual Israel, for it is the
promise of him that cannot lie.
II. God had promised to give them rest in that land, and now they had rest round about,
rest from the fatigues of their travel through the wilderness (which tedious march, perhaps,
was long in their bones), rest from their wars in Canaan, and the insults which their enemies
there had at first offered them. They now dwelt, not only in habitations of their own, but
those quiet and peaceable ones; though there were Canaanites that remained, yet none that
had either strength or spirit to attack them, nor so much as give them an alarm. This rest
continued till they by their own sin and folly put thorns into their own beds and their own
eyes.
III. God had promised to give them victory and success in their wars, and this promise
likewise was fulfilled: There stood not a man before them, v. 44. They had the better in every
battle, and which way soever they turned their forces they prospered. It is true there were
179
Chapter XXI
Canaanites now remaining in many parts of the land, and such as afterwards made head
against them, and became very formidable. But, 1. As to the present remains of the
Canaanites, they were no contradiction to the promise, for God had said he would not drive
them out all at once, but by little and little, Exod. xxiii. 30. They had now as much in their
full possession as they had occasion for and as they had hands to manage, so that the
Canaanites only kept possession of some of the less cultivated parts of the country against
the beasts of the field, till Israel, in process of time, should become numerous enough to
replenish them. 2. As to the after prevalency of the Canaanites, that was purely the effect of
Israel's cowardice and slothfulness, and the punishment of their sinful inclination to the
idolatries and other abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord would have cast out before
them but that they harboured and indulged them. So that the foundation of God stands
sure. Israel's experience of God's fidelity is here upon record, and is an acquittance under
their hands to the honour of God, the vindication of his promise which had been so often
distrusted, and the encouragement of all believers to the end of the world: There failed not
any good thing, no, nor aught of any good thing (so full is it expressed), which the Lord had
spoken unto the house of Israel, but in due time all came to pass, v. 45. Such an acknowledg-
ment as this, here subscribed by Joshua in the name of all Israel, we afterwards find made
by Solomon, and all Israel did in effect say Amen to it, 1 Kings viii. 56. The inviolable truth
of God's promise, and the performance of it to the utmost, are what all the saints have been
ready to bear their testimony to; and, if in any thing the performance has seemed to come
short, they have been as ready to own that they themselves must bear all the blame.
180
