Joshua
IntroductionJoshua
Joshua
AN
1
EXPOSITION,
W I T H   P R A C T I C A L   O B S E R V A T I O N S,
OF THE BOOK OF
J O S H U A.
I. We have now before us the history of the Jewish nation in this book and those that
follow it to the end of the book of Esther. These books, to the end of the books of the Kings,
the Jewish writers call the first book of the prophets, to bring them within the distribution
of the books of the Old Testament, into the Law, the Prophets, and the Chetubim, or Hagi-
ographa, Luke xxiv. 44. The rest they make part of the Hagiographa. For, though history is
their subject, it is justly supposed that prophets were their penmen. To those books that are
purely and properly prophetical the name of the prophet is prefixed, because the credibility
of the prophecies depended much upon the character of the prophets; but these historical
books, it is probable, were collections of the authentic records of the nation, which some of
the prophets (and the Jewish church was for many ages more or less continually blessed
with such) were divinely directed and helped to put together for the service of the church
to the end of the world; as their other officers, so their historiographers, had their authority
from heaven.—It should seem that though the substance of the several histories was written
when the events were fresh in memory, and written under a divine direction, yet, under the
same direction, they were put into the form in which we now have them by some other
hand, long afterwards, probably all by the same hand, or about the same time. The grounds
of the conjecture are, 1. Because former writings are so often referred to, as the Book of
Jasher (Josh. x. 13, and 2 Sam. i. 18), the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and
the books of Gad, Nathan, and Iddo. 2. Because the days when the things were done are
spoken of sometimes as days long since passed; as 1 Sam. ix. 9, He that is now called a
prophet was formerly called a seer. And, 3. Because we so often read of things remaining
unto this day; as stones (Josh. iv. 9; vii. 26; viii. 29; x. 27; 1 Sam. vi. 18), names of places (Josh.
v. 9; vii. 26; Judg. i. 26; xv. 19; xviii. 12; 2 Kings xiv. 7), rights and possessions (Judg. i. 21; 1
Sam. xxvii. 6), customs and usages (1 Sam. v. 5; 2 Kings xvii. 41), which clauses have been
since added to the history by the inspired collectors for the confirmation and illustration of
it to those of their own age. And, if one may offer a mere conjecture, it is not unlikely that
the historical books, to the end of the Kings, were put together by Jeremiah the prophet, a
little before the captivity; for it is said of Ziklag (1 Sam. xxvii. 6) that it pertains to the kings
8
Introduction
of Judah (which style began after Solomon and ended in the captivity) unto this day. And
it is still more probable that those which follow were put together by Ezra the scribe, some
time after the captivity. However, though we are in the dark concerning their authors, we
are in no doubt concerning their authority; they were a part of the oracles of God, which
were committed to the Jews, and were so received and referred to by our Saviour and the
apostles.
In the five books of Moses we had a very full account of the rise, advance, and constitu-
tion, of the Old-Testament church, the family out of which it was raised, the promise, that
great charter by which it was incorporated, the miracles by which it was built up, and the
laws and ordinances by which it was to be governed, from which one would conceive and
expectation of its character and state very different from what we find in this history. A nation
that had statutes and judgments so righteous, one would think, should have been very holy;
and a nation what had promises so rich should have been very happy. But, alas! a great part
of the history is a melancholy representation of their sins and miseries; for the law made
nothing perfect, but this was to be done by the bringing in of the better hope. And yet, if we
compare the history of the Christian church with its constitution, we shall find the same
cause for wonder, so many have been its errors and corruptions; for neither does the gospel
make any thing perfect in this world, but leaves us still in expectation of a better hope in the
future state.
II. We have next before us the book of Joshua, so called, perhaps, not because it was
written by him, for that is uncertain. Dr. Lightfoot thinks that Phinehas wrote it. Bishop
Patrick is clear that Joshua wrote it himself. However that be, it is written concerning him,
and, if any other wrote it, it was collected out of his journals or memoirs. It contains the
history of Israel under the command and government of Joshua, how he presided as general
of their armies, 1. In their entrance into Canaan, ch. i.-v. 2. In their conquest of Canaan, ch.
vi.-xii. 3. In the distribution of the land of Canaan among the tribes of Israel, ch. xiii.-xxi.
4. In the settlement and establishment of religion among them, ch. xxii.-xxiv. In all which
he was a great example of wisdom, courage, fidelity, and piety, to all that are in places of
public trust. But this is not all the use that is to be made of this history. We may see in it, 1.
Much of God and his providence—his power in the kingdom of nature, his justice in punishing
the Canaanites when the measure of their iniquity was full, his faithfulness to his covenant
with the patriarchs, and his kindness to his people Israel, notwithstanding their provocations.
We may see him as the Lord of Hosts determining the issues of war, and as the director of
the lot, determining the bounds of men's habitations. 2. Much of Christ and his grace. Though
Joshua is not expressly mentioned in the New Testament as a type of Christ, yet all agree
that he was a very eminent one. He bore our Saviour's name, as did also another type of
him, Joshua the high priest, Zech. vi. 11, 12. The LXX., giving the name of Joshua a Greek
termination, call him all along Iesous, Jesus, and so he is called Acts vii. 45, and Heb. iv. 8.
9
Introduction
Justin Martyr, one of the first writers of the Christian church (Dialog. cum Tryph. p. mihi
300), makes that promise in Exod. xxiii. 20, My angel shall bring thee into the place I have
prepared, to point at Joshua; and these words, My name is in him, to refer to this, that his
names should be the same with that of the Messiah. It signifies, He shall save. Joshua saves
God's people from the Canaanites; our Lord Jesus saves them from their sins. Christ, as
Joshua, is the captain of our salvation, a leader and commander of the people, to tread Satan
under their feet, to put them in possession of the heavenly Canaan, and to give them rest,
which (it is said, Heb. iv. 8) Joshua did not.
10
