Chapter XXII
you leave behind have your good word, who have allowed you your share in full, though
the land is entirely theirs, and have not offered to make any drawback. Do not say that you
are losers by us." 2. "Let your brethren whom you go to, who abode by the stuff, have some
share of the spoil: Divide the spoil with your brethren, as that was divided which was taken
in the war with Midian, Num. xxxi. 27. Let your brethren that have wanted you all this while
be the better for you when you come home."
III. He dismisses them with a very honourable character. Though their service was a
due debt, and the performance of a promise, and they had done no more than was their
duty to do, yet he highly commends them; not only gives them up their bonds, as it were,
now that they had fulfilled the condition, but applauds their good services. Though it was
by the favour of God and his power that Israel got possession of this land, and he must have
all the glory, yet Joshua thought there was a thankful acknowledgment due to their brethren
who assisted them, and whose sword and bow were employed for them. God must be chiefly
eyed in our praises, yet instruments must not be altogether overlooked. He here commends
them, 1. For the readiness of their obedience to their commanders, v. 2. When Moses was
gone, they remembered and observed the charge he had given them; and all the orders which
Joshua, as general of the forces, had issued out, they had carefully obeyed, went, and came,
and did, as he appointed, Matt. viii. 9. It is as much as any thing the soldier's praise to observe
the word of command. 2. For the constancy of their affection and adherence to their brethren:
You have not left them these many days. How many days he does not say, nor can we gather
it with certainty from any other place. Calvisius and others of the best chronologers compute
that the conquering and dividing of the land was the work of about six or seven years, and
so long these separate tribes attended their camp, and did them the best service they could.
Note, It will be the honour of those that have espoused the cause of God's Israel, and twisted
interests with them, to adhere to them, and never to leave them till God has given them rest,
and then they shall rest with them. 3. For the faithfulness of their obedience to the divine
law. They had not only done their duty to Joshua and Israel, but, which was best of all, they
had made conscience of their duty to God: You have kept the charge, or, as the word is, You
have kept the keeping, that is, "You have carefully and circumspectly kept the commandment
of the Lord your God, not only in this particular instance of continuing in the service of Israel
to the end of the war, but, in general, you have kept up religion in your part of the camp, a
rare and excellent thing among soldiers, and where it is worthy to be praised."
IV. He dismisses them with good counsel, not to cultivate their ground, fortify their
cities, and, now that their hands were inured to war and victory, to invade their neighbours,
and so enlarge their own territories, but to keep up serious godliness among them in the
power of it. They were not political but pious instructions that he gave them, v. 5. 1. In
general, to take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law. Those that have the
commandment have it in vain unless they do the commandment; and it will not be done
183
Chapter XXII
aright (so apt are we to turn aside, and so industrious are our spiritual enemies to turn us
aside) unless we take heed, diligent heed. 2. In particular, to love the Lord our God, as the
best of beings, and the best of friends; and as far as this principle rules in the heart, and is
the spring of its pulses, there will be a constant care and sincere endeavour to walk in his
ways, in all his ways, even those that are narrow and up-hill, in every particular instance, in
all manner of conversation to keep his commandments, at all times and in all conditions
with purpose of heart to cleave unto him, and to serve him and his honour, and the interest
of his kingdom among men, with all our heart and with all our soul. What good counsel
was here given to them is given to us all. God give us grace to take it!
V. He dismisses them with a blessing (v. 6), particularly the half tribe of Manasseh, to
which Joshua, as an Ephraimite, was somewhat nearer akin than to the other two, and who
perhaps were the more loth to depart because they left one half of their own tribe behind
them, and therefore, bidding often farewell, and lingering behind, had a second dismission
and blessing, v. 7. Joshua not only prayed for them as a friend, but blessed them as a father
in the name of the Lord, recommending them, their families, and affairs, to the grace of
God. Some by the blessing Joshua gave them understand the presents he made them, in re-
compence of their services; but Joshua being a prophet, and having given them one part of
a prophet's reward in the instructions he gave them (v. 5), no doubt we must understand
this of the other, even the prayers he made for them, as one having authority, and as God's
vicegerent.
VI. Being thus dismissed, they returned to the land of their possession in a body (v. 9),
ferry-boats being, it is likely, provided for their repassing Jordan. Though masters of families
may sometimes have occasion to be absent, long absent, from their families, yet, when their
business abroad is finished, they must remember home is their place, from which they ought
not to wander as a bird from her nest.
The Altar of the Reubenites. (b. c. 1444.)
10 And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land of Canaan, the
children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh built there an
altar by Jordan, a great altar to see to.   11 And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the
children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have built an
altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of Jordan, at the passage of the children
of Israel.   12 And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the
children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them.   13
And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and
to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,
  14 And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the tribes of Israel;
and each one was a head of the house of their fathers among the thousands of Israel.   15
And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe
184
Chapter XXII
of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spake with them, saying,   16 Thus saith the
whole congregation of the Lord, What trespass is this that ye have committed against the
God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the Lord, in that ye have builded you an
altar, that ye might rebel this day against the Lord?   17 Is the iniquity of Peor too little for
us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was a plague in the con-
gregation of the Lord,   18 But that ye must turn away this day from following the Lord?
and it will be, seeing ye rebel to day against the Lord, that to morrow he will be wroth with
the whole congregation of Israel.   19 Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be
unclean, then pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the Lord, wherein the Lord's
tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel not against the Lord, nor rebel
against us, in building you an altar beside the altar of the Lord our God.   20 Did not Achan
the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the congreg-
ation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.
Here is, I. The pious care of the separated tribes to keep their hold of Canaan's religion,
even when they were leaving Canaan's land, that they might not be as the sons of the stranger,
utterly separated from God's people, Isa. lvi. 3. In order to this, they built a great altar on the
borders of Jordan, to be a witness for them that they were Israelites, and as such partakers
of the altar of the Lord, 1 Cor. x. 18. When they came to Jordan (v. 10) they did not consult
how to preserve the remembrance of their own exploits in the wars of Canaan, and the ser-
vices they had done their brethren, by erecting a monument to the immortal honour of the
two tribes and a half; but their relation to the church of God, together with their interest in
the communion of saints, is that which they are solicitous to preserve and perpetuate the
proofs and evidences of; and therefore without delay, when the thing was first proposed by
some among them, who, though glad to think that they were going towards home, were
sorry to think that they were going from the altar of God, immediately they erected this altar,
which served as a bridge to keep up their fellowship with the other tribes in the things of
God. Some think they built this altar on the Canaan-side of Jordan, in the lot of Benjamin,
that, looking over the river, they might see the figure of the altar at Shiloh, when they could
not conveniently go to it; but it is more likely that they built it on their own side of the water,
for what had they to do to build on another man's land without his consent? And it is said
to be over-against the land of Canaan; nor would there have been any cause of suspecting
it designed for sacrifice if they had not built it among themselves. This altar was very inno-
cently and honestly designed, but it would have been well if, since it had in it an appearance
of evil, and might be an occasion of offence to their brethren, they had consulted the oracle
of God about it before they did it, or at least acquainted their brethren with their purpose,
and given them the same explication of their altar before, to prevent their jealousy, which
they did afterwards, to remove it. Their zeal was commendable, but it ought to have been
guided with discretion. There was no need to hasten the building of an altar for the purpose
185
Chapter XXII
for which they intended this, but they might have taken time to consider and take advice;
yet, when their sincerity was made to appear, we do not find that they were blamed for their
rashness. God does, and men should, overlook the weakness of an honest zeal.
II. The holy jealousy of the other tribes for the honour of God and his altar at Shiloh.
Notice was immediately brought to the princes of Israel of the setting up of this altar, v. 11.
And they, knowing how strict and severe that law was which required them to offer all their
sacrifices in the place which God should choose, and not elsewhere (Deut. xii. 5-7), were
soon apprehensive that the setting up of another altar was an affront to the choice which
God had lately made of a place to put his name in, and had a direct tendency to the worship
of some other God. Now,
1. Their suspicion was very excusable, for it must be confessed the thing, prima facie—at
first sight, looked ill, and seemed to imply a design to set up and maintain a competitor with
the altar at Shiloh. It was no strained innuendo from the building of an altar to infer an in-
tention to offer sacrifice upon it, and that might introduce idolatry and end in a total apostasy
from the faith and worship of the God of Israel. So great a matter might this fire kindle. God
is jealous for his own institutions, and therefore we should be so too, and afraid of every
thing that looks like, or leads to, idolatry.
2. Their zeal, upon this suspicion, was very commendable, v. 12. When they apprehended
that these tribes, which by the river Jordan were separated from them, were separating
themselves from God, they took it as the greatest injury that could be done to themselves,
and showed a readiness, if it were necessary, to put their lives in their hands in defence of
the altar of God, and to take up arms for the chastising and reducing of these rebels, and to
prevent the spreading of the infection, if no gentler methods would serve, by cutting off
from their body the gangrened member. They all gathered together, and Shiloh was the
place of their rendezvous, because it was in defence of the divine charter lately granted to
that place that they now appeared; their resolution was as became a kingdom of priests,
who, being devoted to God and his service, did not acknowledge their brethren nor know
their own children, Deut. xxxiii. 9. They would immediately go up to war against them if it
appeared they had revolted from God, and were in rebellion against him. Though they were
bone of their bone, had been companions with them in tribulation in the wilderness, and
serviceable to them in the wars of Canaan, yet, if they turn to serve other gods, they will treat
them as enemies, not as sons of Israel, but as children of whoredoms, for so God had appoin-
ted, Deut. xiii. 12, &c. They had but lately sheathed their swords, and retired from the perils
and fatigues of war to the rest God had given them, and yet they are willing to begin a new
war rather than be any way wanting in their duty to restrain, repress, and revenge, idolatry,
and every step towards it—a brave resolution, and which shows them hearty for their religion,
and, we hope, careful and diligent in the practice of it themselves. Corruptions in religion
are best dealt with at first, before they get head and plead prescription.
186
Chapter XXII
3. Their prudence in the prosecution of this zealous resolution is no less commendable.
God had appointed them, in cases of this nature, to enquire and make search (Deut. xiii.
14), that they might not wrong their brethren under pretence of righting their religion; ac-
cordingly they resolve here not to send forth their armies, to wage war, till they had first
sent their ambassadors to enquire into the merits of the cause, and these men of the first
rank, one out of each tribe, and Phinehas at the head of them to be their spokesman, v. 13,
14. Thus was their zeal for God tempered, guided, and governed by the meekness of wisdom.
He that knows all things, and hates all evil things, would not punish the worst of criminals
but he would first go down and see, Gen. xviii. 21. Many an unhappy strife would be preven-
ted, or soon healed by an impartial and favourable enquiry into that which is the matter of
the offence. The rectifying of mistakes and misunderstandings, and the setting of miscon-
strued words and actions in a true light, would be the most effectual way to accommodate
both private and public quarrels, and bring them to a happy period.
4. The ambassadors' management of this matter came fully up to the sense and spirit
of the congregation concerning it, and bespeaks much both of zeal and prudence.
(1.) The charge they draw up against their brethren is indeed very high, and admits no
other excuse than that it was in their zeal for the honour of God, and was now intended to
justify the resentments of the congregation at Shiloh and to awaken the supposed delinquents
to clear themselves, otherwise they might have suspended their judgment, or mollified it at
least, and not have taken it for granted, as they do here (v. 16), that the building of this altar
was a trespass against the God of Israel, and a trespass no less heinous than the revolt of
soldiers from their captain (you turn from following the Lord), and the rebellion of subjects
against their sovereign: that you might rebel this day against the Lord. Hard words. It is well
they were not able to make good their charge. Let not innocency think it strange to be thus
misrepresented and accused. They laid to my charge things that I knew not.
(2.) The aggravation of the crime charged upon their brethren is somewhat far-fetched:
Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us? v. 17. Probably that is mentioned because Phinehas,
the first commissioner in this treaty, had signalized himself in that matter (Num. xxv. 7),
and because we may suppose they were not about the very place in which that iniquity was
committed on the other side Jordan. It is good to recollect and improve those instances of
the wrath of God, revealed from heaven against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
which have fallen out in our own time, and which we ourselves have been eye-witnesses of.
He reminds them of the iniquity of Peor, [1.] As a very great sin, and very provoking to
God. The building of this altar seemed but a small matter, but it might lead to an iniquity
as bad as that of Peor, and therefore must be crushed in its first rise. Note, The remembrance
of great sins committed formerly should engage us to stand upon our guard against the least
occasions and beginnings of sin; for the way of sin is down-hill. [2.] As a sin that the whole
congregation had smarted for: "There was a plague in the congregation of the Lord, of which,
187
Chapter XXII
in one day, there died no fewer than 24,000; was not that enough for ever to warn you against
idolatry? What! will you bring upon yourselves another plague? Are you so mad upon an
idolatrous altar that you will run yourselves thus upon the sword's point of God's judgments?
Does not our camp still feel from that sin and the punishment of it? We are not cleansed
from it unto this day; there are remaining sparks," First, "Of the infection of that sin; some
among us so inclined to idolatry that if you set up another altar they will soon take occasion
from that, whether you intend it or no, to worship another God." Secondly, "Of the wrath
of God against us for that sin. We have reason to fear that, if we provoke God by another
sin to visit, he will remember against us the iniquity of Peor, as he threatened to do that of
the golden calf, Exod. xxxii. 34. And dare you wake the sleeping lion of divine vengeance?"
Note, It is a foolish and dangerous thing for people to think their former sins little, too little
for them, as those do who add sin to sin, and so treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.
Let therefore the time past suffice, 1 Pet. iv. 3.
(3.) The reason they give for their concerning themselves so warmly in this matter is
very sufficient. They were obliged to it, in their own necessary defence, by the law of self-
preservation: "For, if you revolt from God to-day, who knows but to-morrow his judgments
may break in upon the whole congregation (v. 18), as in the case of Achan? v. 20. He sinned,
and we all smarted for it, by which we should receive instruction, and from what God did
then infer what he may do, and fear what he will do, if we do not witness against your sin,
who are so many, and punish it." Note, The conservators of the public peace are obliged, in
justice to the common safety, to use their power for the restraining and suppressing of vice
and profaneness, lest, if it be connived at, the sin thereby become national, and bring God's
judgments upon the community. Nay, we are all concerned to reprove our neighbour when
he does amiss, lest we bear sin for him, Lev. xix. 17.
(4.) The offer they make is very fair and kind (v. 19), that if they thought the land of
their possession unclean, for want of an altar, and therefore could not be easy without one,
rather than they should set up another in competition with that at Shiloh they should be
welcome to come back to the land where the Lord's tabernacle was, and settle there, and they
would very willingly straiten themselves to make room for them. By this they showed a
sincere and truly pious zeal against schism, that rather than their brethren should have any
occasion to set up a separate altar, though their pretence for it, as here supposed, was very
weak and grounded upon a great mistake, yet they were willing to part with a considerable
share of the land which God himself had by the lot assigned them, to comprehend them
and take them in among them. This was the spirit of Israelites indeed.
21 Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh
answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands of Israel,   22 The Lord God of gods,
the Lord God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in
transgression against the Lord, (save us not this day,)   23 That we have built us an altar to
188
Chapter XXII
turn from following the Lord, or if to offer thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to
offer peace offerings thereon, let the Lord himself require it;   24 And if we have not rather
done it for fear of this thing, saying, In time to come your children might speak unto our
children, saying, What have ye to do with the Lord God of Israel?   25 For the Lord hath
made Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and children of Gad; ye
have no part in the Lord: so shall your children make our children cease from fearing the
Lord.   26 Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offering,
nor for sacrifice:   27 But that it may be a witness between us, and you, and our generations
after us, that we might do the service of the Lord before him with our burnt offerings, and
with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your children may not say to our
children in time to come, Ye have no part in the Lord.   28 Therefore said we, that it shall
be, when they should so say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say
again, Behold the pattern of the altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, not for burnt
offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness between us and you.   29 God forbid that we
should rebel against the Lord, and turn this day from following the Lord, to build an altar
for burnt offerings, for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the Lord our God
that is before his tabernacle.
We may suppose there was a general convention called of the princes and great men of
the separate tribes, to give audience to these ambassadors; or perhaps the army, as it came
home, was still encamped in a body, and not yet dispersed; however it was, there were enough
to represent the two tribes and a half, and to give their sense. Their reply to the warm remon-
strance of the ten tribes is very fair and ingenuous. They do not retort their charge, upbraid
them with the injustice and unkindness of their threatenings, nor reproach them for their
rash and hasty censures, but give them a soft answer which turns away wrath, avoiding all
those grievous words which stir up anger; they demur not to their jurisdiction, nor plead that
they were not accountable to them for what they had done, nor bid them mind their own
business, but, by a free and open declaration of their sincere intention in what they did, free
themselves from the imputation they were under, and set themselves right in the opinion
of their brethren, to do which they only needed to state the case and put the matter in a true
light.
I. They solemnly protest against any design to use this altar for sacrifice or offering, and
therefore were far from setting it up in competition with the altar at Shiloh, or from enter-
taining the least thought of deserting that. They had indeed set up that which had the shape
and fashion of an altar, but they had not dedicated it to a religious use, had had no solemnity
of its consecration, and therefore ought not to be charged with a design to put it to any such
use. To gain credit to this protestation here is,
1. A solemn appeal to God concerning it, with which they begin their defence, intending
thereby to give glory to God first, and then to give satisfaction to their brethren, v. 22. (1.)
189
Chapter XXII
A profound awe and reverence of God are expressed in the form of their appeal: The Lord
God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knows. Or, as it might be read somewhat closer to the
original, The God of gods, Jehovah, the God of gods, Jehovah, he knows, which bespeaks his
self-existence and self-sufficiency; he is Jehovah, and has sovereignty and supremacy over
all beings and powers whatsoever, even those that are called gods, or that are worshipped.
This brief confession of their faith would help to obviate and remove their brethren's suspi-
cion of them, as if they intended to desert the God of Israel, and worship other gods: how
could those entertain such a thought who believed him to be God over all? Let us learn hence
always to speak of God with reverence and seriousness, and to mention his name with a
solemn pause. Those who make their appeals to heaven with a slight, careless, "God knows,"
have reason to fear lest they take his name in vain, for it is very unlike this appeal. (2.) It is
a great confidence of their own integrity which they express in the matter of their appeal.
They refer the controversy to the God of gods, whose judgment, we are sure, is according
to truth, such as the guilty have reason to dread and the upright to rejoice in. "If it be in re-
bellion or transgression that we have built this altar, to confront the altar of the Lord at
Shiloh, to make a party, or to set up any new gods or worships," [1.] "He knows it (v. 22),
for he is perfectly acquainted with the thoughts and intents of the heart, and particularly
with all inclinations to idolatry (Ps. xliv. 20, 21); this is in a particular manner before him.
We believe he knows it, and we cannot by any arts conceal it from him." [2.] "Let him require
it, as we know he will, for he is a jealous God." Nothing but a clear conscience would have
thus imprecated divine justice to avenge the rebellion if there had been any. Note, First, In
every thing we do in religion, it highly concerns us to approve ourselves to God in our in-
tegrity therein, remembering that he knows the heart. Secondly, When we fall under the
censures of men, it is very comfortable to be able with a humble confidence to appeal to
God concerning our sincerity. See 1 Cor. iv. 3, 4.
2. A sober apology presented to their brethren: Israel, he shall know. Though the record
on high, and the witness in our bosoms, are principally to be made sure for us, yet there is
a satisfaction besides which we owe to our brethren who doubt concerning our integrity,
and which we should be ready to give with meekness and fear. If our sincerity be known to
God, we should study likewise to let others know it by its fruits, especially those who, though
they mistake us, yet show a zeal for the glory of God, as the ten tribes here did.
3. A serious abjuration or renunciation of the design which they were suspected to be
guilty of. With this they conclude their defence (v. 29): "God forbid that we should rebel
against the Lord, as we own we should if we had set up this altar for burnt-offerings; no, we
abhor the thought of it. We have as great a value and veneration for the altar of the Lord at
Shiloh as any of the tribes of Israel have, and are as firmly resolved to adhere to it and con-
stantly to attend it; we have the same concern that you have for the purity of God's worship
190
