Chapter III
was the same God that made the world and that it was the same power that was engaged
and employed for them.
3. The people having been directed before to follow the ark are here told that it should
pass before them into Jordan, v. 11. Observe, (1.) The ark of the covenant must be their guide.
During the reign of Moses, the cloud was their guide, but now, in Joshua's reign, the ark;
both were visible signs of God's presence and presidency, but divine grace under the Mosaic
dispensation was wrapt up as in a cloud and covered with a veil, while by Christ, our Joshua,
it is revealed in the ark of the covenant unveiled. (2.) It is called the ark of the covenant of
the Lord of all the earth. "He that is your God (v. 9), in covenant with you, is the Lord of all
the earth, has both right and power to command, control, use, and dispose of all nations
and of all creatures. He is the Lord of all the earth, therefore he needs not you, nor can he
be benefited by you; therefore it is your honour and happiness to have him in covenant with
you: if he be yours, all the creatures are at your service, and when he pleases shall be employed
for you." When we are praising and worshipping God as Israel's God, and ours through
Christ, we must remember that he is the Lord of the whole earth, and reverence him and
trust in him accordingly. Some observe an accent in the original, which they think directs
us to translate it somewhat more emphatically, Behold the ark of the covenant, even the ark
of the Lord, or even of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth. (3.) They are told that the ark
should pass before them into Jordan. God would not appoint them to go any where but where
he himself would go before them and go with them; and they might safely venture, even
into Jordan itself, if the ark of the covenant led them. While we make God's precepts our
rule, his promises our stay, and his providence our guide, we need not dread the greatest
difficulties we may meet with in the way of duty. That promise is sure to all the seed (Isa.
xliii. 2), When thou passes through the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers they
shall not overflow thee.
4. From what God was now about to do for them he infers an assurance of what he
would yet further do. This he mentions first, so much was his heart upon it, and so great a
satisfaction did it give him (v. 10): "Hereby you shall know that the living God (the true God,
and God of power, not one of the dead gods of the heathen) is among you, though you see
him not, nor are to have any image of him, is among you to give you law, secure your welfare,
and receive your homage,—is among you in this great undertaking now before you; and
therefore you shall, nay, he himself will, without fail, drive out from before you the Canaan-
ites." So that the dividing of Jordan was intended to be to them, (1.) A sure token of God's
presence with them. By this they could not but know that God was among them, unless their
unbelief was as obstinate against the most convincing evidence as that of their fathers was,
who presently after God had divided the Red Sea before them, impudently asked, Is the Lord
among us, or is he not? Exod. xvii. 7. (2.) A sure pledge of the conquest of Canaan. "If the
living God is among you, expelling he will expel (so the Hebrew phrase is) from before you
35
Chapter III
the Canaanites." He will do it certainly, and do it effectually. What should hinder him? What
can stand in his way before whom rivers are divided and dried up? The forcing of the lines
was certain presage of the ruin of all their hosts: how could they stand their ground when
Jordan itself was driven back? When they had not courage to dispute this pass, but trembled
at the approach of the mighty God of Jacob (Ps. cxiv. 7), what opposition could they ever
make after this? This assurance which Joshua here gives them was so well grounded that it
would enable one Israelite to chase a thousand Canaanites, and two to put ten thousand to
flight; and it would be abundantly strengthened by remembering the song of Moses, dictated
forty years before, which plainly foretold the dividing of Jordan and the influence it would
have upon the driving out of the Canaanites. Exod. xv. 15-17, "The inhabitants of Canaan
shall melt away, and so be effectually driven out; they shall be as still as a stone till thy people
pass over, and then thou shalt bring them in and plant them." Note, God's glorious appear-
ances for his church and people ought to be improved by us for the encouragement of our
faith and hope for the future. As for God, his work is perfect. If Jordan's flood cannot keep
them out, Canaan's force cannot turn them out again.
5. He directs them to get twelve men ready, one of each tribe, who must be within call
to receive such orders as Joshua should afterwards give them, v. 12. It does not appear that
they were to attend the priests, and walk with them when they carried the ark, that they
might more immediately be witnesses of the wonders done by it, as some think; but they
were to be at hand for the service they were called to, ch. iv. 4, &c.
The Passage over the Jordan. (b. c. 1451.)
14 And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over Jordan,
and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people;   15 And as they that bare
the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in
the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest,)   16 That
the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon a heap very far from the
city Adam, that is beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain,
even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed over right against Jericho.
  17 And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground
in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people
were passed clean over Jordan.
Here we have a short and plain account of the dividing of the river Jordan, and the
passage of the children of Israel through it. The story is not garnished with the flowers of
rhetoric (gold needs not to be painted), but it tell us, in short, matter of fact.
I. That this river was now broader and deeper than usually it was at other times of the
year, v. 15. The melting of the snow on the mountains of Lebanon, near which this river
had its rise, was the occasion that at the time of harvest, barley-harvest, which was the spring
of the year, Jordan overflowed all his banks. This great flood, just at that time (which
36
Chapter III
Providence might have restrained for once, of which he might have ordered them to cross
at another time of the year) very much magnified the power of God and his kindness to Israel.
Note, Though the opposition given to the salvation of God's people have all imaginable ad-
vantages, yet God can and will conquer it. Let the banks of Jordan be filled to the brink,
filled till they run over, it is as easy to Omnipotence to divide them, and dry them up, as if
they were ever so narrow, ever so shallow; it is all one with the Lord.
II. That as soon as ever the feet of the priests dipped in the brim of the water the stream
stopped immediately, as if a sluice had been led down to dam it up, v. 15, 16. So that the
waters above swelled, stood on a heap, and ran back, and yet, as it should seem did not
spread, but congealed, which unaccountable rising of the river was observed with amazement
by those that live upward upon it many miles off, and the remembrance of it remained
among them long after: the waters on the other side this invisible dam ran down of course,
and left the bottom of the river dry as far downward, it is likely, as they swelled upward.
When they passed through the red Sea, the waters were a wall on either hand, here only on
the right-hand. Note, The God of nature can, when he pleases, change the course of nature,
and alter its properties, can turn fluids into solids, waters into standing rocks, as, on the
contrary, rocks into standing waters, to serve his own purposes. See Ps. cxiv. 5, 8. What
cannot God do? What will he not do for the perfecting of his peoples, salvation? Sometimes
he cleaves the earth with rivers (Hab. iii. 9), and sometimes, as here, cleaves the rivers without
earth. It is easy to imagine how, when the course of this strong rapid stream was arrested
on a sudden, the waters roared and were troubled, so that the mountains seemed to shake
with the swelling thereof (Ps. xlvi. 3), how the floods lifted up their voice, the floods lifted up
their waves, while the Lord on high showed himself mightier than the noise of these many
waters, Ps. xciii. 3, 4. With reference to this the prophet asks, Was the Lord displeased against
the rivers? was thine anger against the rivers? Hab. iii. 8. No, Thou wentest forth for the sal-
vation of thy people, v. 13. In allusion to this, it is foretold, among the great things God will
do for the gospel church in the latter days, that the great river Euphrates shall be dried up,
that the way of the kings of the east may be prepared, Rev. xvi. 12. When the time has come
for Israel's entrance into the land of promise all difficulties shall be conquered, mountains
shall become plains (Zech. iv. 7) and rivers become dry, for the ransomed of the Lord to pass
over. When we have finished our pilgrimage through this wilderness, death will be like this
Jordan between us and the heavenly Canaan, but the ark of the covenant has prepare us a
way through it; it is the last enemy that shall be destroyed.
III. That the people passed over right against Jericho, which was, 1. An instance of their
boldness, and a noble defiance of their enemies. Jericho was one of the strongest cities, and
yet they dared to face it at their first entrance. 2. It was an encouragement to them to venture
through Jordan, for Jericho was a goodly city and the country about it extremely pleasant;
and, having that in view as their own, what difficulties could discourage them from taking
37
Chapter III
possession? 3. It would increase the confusion and terror of their enemies, who no doubt
strictly observed their motions, and were the amazed spectators of this work of wonders.
IV. That the priests stood still in the midst of Jordan while all the people passed over, v.
17. There the ark was appointed to be, to show that the same power that parted the waters
kept them parted as long as there was occasion; and had not the divine presence, of which
the ark was a token, been their security, the waters would have returned upon them and
buried them. There the priests were appointed to stand still, 1. To try their faith, whether
they could venture to take their post, when god assigned it to them, with mountains of water
over their heads. As they made a bold step when they set the first foot into Jordan, so now
they made a bold stand when they tarried longest in Jordan; but they knew they carried their
own protection with them. Note, Ministers in times of peril should be examples of courage
and confidence in the divine goodness. 2. It was to encourage the faith of the people, that
they might go triumphantly into Canaan, and fear no evil, no, not in this valley of the shadow
of death (for so the divided river was), being assured of God's presence, which interposed
between them and the greatest danger, between them and the proud waters, which otherwise
had gone over their souls. Thus in the greatest dangers the saints are comforted with his rod
and his staff, Ps. xxiii. 4.
38
Chapter IV
Chapter IV
J O S H U A
CHAP. IV.
This chapter gives a further account of the miraculous passage of Israel through Jordan.
I. The provision that was made at that time to preserve the memorial of it, by twelve stones
set up in Jordan (ver. 9) and other twelve stones taken up out of Jordan, ver. 1-8. II. The
march of the people through Jordan's channel, the two tribes first, then all the people, and
the priests that bore the ark last, ver. 10-14. III. The closing of the waters again upon their
coming up with the ark, ver. 15-19. IV. The erecting of the monument in Gilgal, to preserve
the remembrance of this work of wonder to posterity, ver. 20-24.
The Passage over the Jordan. (b. c. 1451.)
1 And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over Jordan, that the Lord
spake unto Joshua, saying,   2 Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a
man,   3 And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of
the place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall carry them over with
you, and leave them in the lodging place, where ye shall lodge this night.   4 Then Joshua
called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a
man:   5 And Joshua said unto them, Pass over before the ark of the Lord your God into the
midst of Jordan, and take ye up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto
the number of the tribes of the children of Israel:   6 That this may be a sign among you,
that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these
stones?   7 Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark
of the covenant of the Lord; when it passed over Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off:
and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.   8 And the
children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the midst
of Jordan, as the Lord spake unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children
of Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them
down there.   9 And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place where
the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant stood: and they are there unto this
day.
We may well imagine how busy Joshua and all the men of war were while they were
passing over Jordan, when besides their own marching into an enemy's country, and in the
face of the enemy, which could not but occasion them many thoughts of heart, they had
their wives, and children, and families, their cattle, and tents, and all their effects, bag and
baggage, to convey by this strange and untrodden path, which we must suppose either very
muddy or very stony, troublesome to the weak and frightful to the timorous, the descent to
the bottom of the river and the ascent out of it steep, so that every man must needs have his
head full of care and his hands full of business, and Joshua more than any of them. And yet,
39
Chapter IV
in the midst of all his hurry, care must be taken to perpetuate the memorial of this wondrous
work of God, and this care might not be adjourned to a time of greater leisure. Note, How
much soever we have to do of business for ourselves and our families, we must not neglect
nor omit what we have to do for the glory of God and the serving of his honour, for that is
our best business. Now,
I. God gave orders for the preparing of this memorial. Had Joshua done it without divine
direction, it might have looked like a design to perpetuate his own name and honour, nor
would it have commanded so sacred and venerable a regard from posterity as now, when
god himself appointed it. Note, God's works of wonder ought to be kept in everlasting re-
membrance, and means devise for the preserving of the memorial of them. Some of the Is-
raelites that passed over Jordan perhaps were so stupid, and so little affected with this great
favour of God to them, that they felt no concern to have it remembered; while others, it may
be, were so much affected with it, and had such deep impressions made upon them by it,
that they thought there needed no memorial of it to be erected, the heart and tongue of
every Israelite in every age would be a living lasting monument of it. But God, knowing
their frame, and how apt they had been soon to forget his works, ordered an expedient for
the keeping of this in remembrance to all generations, that those who could not, or would
not, read the record of it in the sacred history, might come to the knowledge of it by the
monument set up in remembrance of it, of which the common tradition of the country
would be an explication; it would likewise serve to corroborate the proof of the matter of
fact, and would remain a standing evidence of it to those who in after-ages might question
the truth of it. A monument is to be erected, and, 1. Joshua, as chief captain, must five dir-
ection about it (v. 1): When all the people had clean passed over Jordan, not even the feeble,
that were the hindmost of them, left behind, so that God had done his work completely,
and every Israelite got safe into Canaan, then God spoke unto Joshua to provide materials
for this monument. It is the pious conjecture of the learned bishop Patrick that Joshua had
gone into some place of retirement to return thanks immediately for this wonderful mercy,
and then God met him, and spoke thus to him. Or, perhaps, it was by Eleazar the priest that
God gave these and other instructions to Joshua; for, though he is not mentioned here, yet,
when Joshua was ordained by the imposition of hands to this great trust, God appointed
that Eleazar should ask counsel for him after the judgment of Urim, and at his word Joshua
and all the children of Israel must go out and come in, Num. xxvii. 21. 2. One man out of
each tribe, and he a chosen man, must be employed to prepare materials for this monument,
that each tribe might have the story told them by one of themselves, and each tribe might
contribute something to the glory of God thereby (v. 2, 4): Out of every tribe a man. Not the
Levites only, but every Israelite must, in his place, help to make known to the sons of men
God's mighty acts, Ps. cxlv. 12. The two tribes, though seated already in their possession,
yet, sharing in the mercy, must lend a hand to the memorial of it. 3. The stones that must
40
Chapter IV
be set up for this memorial are ordered to be taken out of the midst of the channel (where,
probably, there lay abundance of great stones), and as near as might be from the very place
where the priests stood with the ark, v. 3, 5. This intended monument deserved to be made
of stones curiously cut with the finest and most exquisite art, but these stones out of the
bottom of the river were more natural and more apt indications of the miracle. let posterity
know by this that Jordan was driven back, for these very stones were then fetched out of it.
In the institution of signs, God always chose that which was most proper and significant,
rather than that which is pompous or curious; for God hath chosen the foolish things of the
world. These twelve men, after they got over Jordan, must be sent back to the place where
the ark stood, being permitted to come near it (which others might not) for this service:
"Pass over before the ark (v. 5), that is, into the presence of the ark, which now stands in the
midst of Jordan, and thence fetch these stones." 4. The use of these stones is here appointed
for a sign (v. 6), a memorial, v. 7. They would give occasion to the children to ask their
parents in time to come, How came these stones hither? (probably the land about not being
stony), and then the parents would inform them, as they themselves had been informed,
that in this place Jordan was divided by the almighty power of God, to give Israel passage
into Canaan, as Joshua enlarges on this head, v. 22, &c.
II. According to these orders the thing was done. 1. Twelve stones were taken up out of
the midst of Jordan, and carried in the sight of the people to the place where they had their
head-quarters that night, v. 8. It is probable that the stones they took were as big as they
could well carry, and as near as might be of a size and shape. But whether they went away
with them immediately to the place, of whether they staid to attend the ark, and kept pace
with the solemn procession of that, to grace its triumphant entry in to Canaan, is not certain.
By these stones which they were ordered to take up God did, as it were, give them livery and
seisin of this good land; it is all their own, let them enter and take possession; therefore what
these twelve did the children of Israel are said to do (v. 8), because they were the represent-
atives of their respective tribes. In allusion to this, we may observe that when the Lord Jesus,
our Joshua, having overcome the sharpness of death and dried up that Jordan, had opened
the kingdom of heaven to all believers, he appointed his twelve apostles according to the
number of the tribes of Israel, by the memorial of the gospel to transmit the knowledge of
this to remote places and future ages. 2. Other twelve stones (probably much larger than
the other, for we read not that they were each of them one man's load) were set up in the
midst of Jordan (v. 9), piled up so high in a heap or pillar as that the top of it might be seen
above the water when the river was low, or seen in the water when it was clear, or at least
the noise of commotion of the water passing over it would be observable, and the bargemen
would avoid it, as they do a rock. Some way or other, it is likely, it was discernible, so as to
notify the very place where the ark stood, and to serve for a duplicate to the other monument,
41
Chapter IV
which was to set up on dry land in Gilgal, for the confirming of its testimony and the pre-
serving of its tradition. The sign being doubled, no doubt the thing was certain.
10 For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan, until every thing was
finished that the Lord commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all that
Moses commanded Joshua: and the people hasted and passed over.   11 And it came to pass,
when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of the Lord passed over, and the
priests, in the presence of the people.   12 And the children of Reuben, and the children of
Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as
Moses spake unto them:   13 About forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the
Lord unto battle, to the plains of Jericho.   14 On that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the
sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.   15 And
the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying,   16 Command the priests that bear the ark of the testi-
mony, that they come up out of Jordan.   17 Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying,
Come ye up out of Jordan.   18 And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of
the covenant of the Lord were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the soles of the
priests' feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the waters of Jordan returned unto their
place, and flowed over all his banks, as they did before.   19 And the people came up out of
Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of
Jericho.
The inspired historian seems to be so well pleased with his subject here that he is loth
to quit it, and is therefore very particular in his narrative, especially in observing how closely
Joshua pursued the orders God gave him, and that he did nothing without divine direction,
finishing all that the Lord had commanded him (v. 10), which is also said to be what Moses
commanded. We read not of any particular commands that Moses gave to Joshua about this
matter: the thing was altogether new to him. It must therefore be understood of the general
instructions Moses had given him to follow the divine direction, to deliver that to the people
which he received of the Lord, and to take all occasions to remind them of their duty to God,
as the best return for his favours to them. This which Moses, who was now dead and gone,
had said to him, he had in mind at this time, and did accordingly. It is well for us to have
the good instructions that have been given us ready to us when we have occasion for them.
I. The people hasted and passed over, v. 10. Some understand this of the twelve men that
carried the stones, but it seems rather to be meant of the body of the people; for, though an
account was given of their passing over (v. 1), yet here it is repeated for the sake of this cir-
cumstance, which was to be added, that they passed over in haste, either because Joshua by
their officers ordered them to make haste, for it was to be but one day's work and they must
not leave a hoof behind, or perhaps it was their own inclination that hastened them. 1. Some
hasted because they were not able to trust God. They were afraid the waters should return
upon them, being conscious of guilt, and diffident of the divine power and goodness. 2.
42
Chapter IV
Others because they were not willing to tempt God to continue the miracle longer than
needs must, nor would they put the patience of the priests that bore the ark too much to
the stretch by unnecessary delay. 3. Others because they were eager to be in Canaan, and
would thus show how much they longed after that pleasant land. 4. Those that considered
least, yet hasted because others did. He that believeth doth not make haste to anticipate
God's counsels, but he makes haste to attend them, Isa. xxviii. 16.
II. The two tribes and a half led the van, v. 12, 13. So they had promised when they had
their lot given them on that side Jordan, Num. xxxii. 27. And Joshua had lately reminded
them of their promise, ch. i. 12-15. It was fit that those who had the first settlement should
be the first in the encounter of difficulties, the rather because they had not the incumbrance
of families with them as the other tribes had, and they were all chose men, and fit for service,
ready armed. It was a good providence that they had so strong a body to lead them on, and
would be an encouragement to the rest. And the two tribes had no reason to complain: the
post of danger is the post of honour.
III. When all the people had got clear to the other side, the priests with the ark came up
out of Jordan. This, one would think, should have been done of course; their own reason
would tell them that now there was no more occasion for them, and yet they did not stir a
step till Joshua ordered them to move, and Joshua did not order them out of Jordan till God
directed him to do so, v. 15-17. So observant were they of Joshua, and he of God, which was
their praise, as it was their happiness to be under such good direction. How low a condition
soever God may at any time bring his priests or people to, let them patiently wait, till by his
providence he shall call them up out of it, as the priests here were called to come up out of
Jordan, and let them not be weary of waiting, while they have the tokens of God's presence
with them, even the ark of the covenant, in the depth of their adversity.
IV. As soon as ever the priests and the ark had come up out of Jordan, the waters of the
river, which had stood on a heap, gradually flowed down according to their nature and
usual course, and soon filled the channel again, v. 18. This makes it yet more evident that
the stop which had now been given to the river was not from any secret natural cause, but
purely from the power of God's presence, and for the sake of his Israel; for when Israel's
turn was served, and the token of God's presence was removed, immediately the water went
forward again; so that if it be asked, What ailed thee, O Jordan! that thou wast driven back?
It must be answered, It was purely in obedience to the God of Israel, and in kindness to the
Israel of God. There is therefore none like unto the God of Jeshurun; happy also art thou, O
Israel! who is like unto thee, O people? Some observe here, by way of allusion, that when the
ark, and the priests that bore it, are removed from any place, the flood-gates are drawn up,
the defence has departed, and an inundation of judgments is to be expected shortly. Those
that are unchurched will soon be undone. The glory has departed if the ark is taken.
43
Chapter IV
V. Notice is taken of the honour put upon Joshua by all this (v. 14): On that day the
Lord magnified Joshua, both by the fellowship he admitted him to with himself, speaking
to him upon all occasions and being ready to be consulted by him, and by the authority he
confirmed him in over both priests and people. Those that honour God he will honour, and
when he will magnify a man, as he had said he would magnify Joshua (ch. iii. 7), he will do
it effectually. Yet it was not for Joshua's sake only that he was thus magnified, but to put
him in a capacity of doing so much the more service to Israel, for hereupon they feared him
as they feared Moses. See here what is the best and surest way to command the respect of
inferiors, and to gain their reverence and observance, not by blustering and threatening,
and carrying it with a high hand, but by holiness and love, and all possible indications of a
constant regard to their welfare, and to God's will and honour. Those are feared in the best
manner, and to the best purpose, who make it to appear that God is with them, and that
they set him before them. Those that are sanctified are truly magnified, and are worthy of
double honour. Favourites of heaven should be looked on with awe.
VI. An account is kept of the time of this great event (v. 19): it was on the tenth day of
the first month, just forty years since they came out of Egypt, wanting five days. God had
said in his wrath that they should wander forty years in the wilderness, but, to make up that
forty, we must take in the first year, which was then past, and had been a year of triumph
in their deliverance out of Egypt, and this last, which had been a year of triumph likewise
on the other side Jordan, so that all the forty were not years of sorrow; and at last he brought
them into Canaan five days before the forty years were ended, to show how little pleasure
God takes in punishing, how swift he is to show mercy, and that for the elects' sake the days
of trouble are shortened, Matt. xxiv. 22. God ordered it so that they should enter Canaan
four days before the annual solemnity of the passover, and on the very day when the prepar-
ation for it was to begin (Exod. xii. 3), because he would have their entrance into Canaan
graced and sanctified with that religious feast, and would have them then to be reminded
of their deliverance out of Egypt, that, comparing them together, God might be glorified as
the Alpha and Omega of their bliss.
20 And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in Gilgal.
  21 And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shall ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, What mean these stones?   22 Then ye shall let your children
know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.   23 For the Lord your God dried
up the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as the Lord your God
did to the Red sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over:   24 That all
the people of the earth might know the hand of the Lord, that it is mighty: that ye might
fear the Lord your God for ever.
44
Chapter IV
The twelve stones which were laid down in Gilgal (v. 8) are here set up either one upon
another, yet so as that they might be distinctly counted, or one by another in rows; for after
they were fixed they are not call a heap of stones, but these stones.
I. It is here taken for granted that posterity would enquire into the meaning of them,
supposing them intended for a memorial: Your children shall ask their fathers (for who else
should they ask?) What mean these stones? Notes, Those that will be wise when they are old
must be inquisitive when they are young. Our Lord Jesus, though he had in himself the
fulness of knowledge, has by his example taught children and young people to hear and ask
questions, Luke ii. 46. Perhaps when John was baptizing in Jordan at Bethabara (the house
of passage, where the people passed over) he pointed at these very stones, while saying (Matt.
iii. 9) God is able of these stones (which were at first set up by the twelve tribes) to raise up
children unto Abraham. The stones being the memorial of the miracle, the children's question
gave occasion for the improvement of it; but our Saviour says (Luke x. 40), If the children
should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out; for one way or other the Lord
will be glorified in his works of wonder.
II. The parents are here directed what answer to give to this enquiry (v. 22): "You shall
let your children know that which you have yourselves learned from the written word and
from your fathers." Note, It is the duty of parents to acquaint their children betimes with
the word and works of God, that they may be trained up in the way they should go.
1. They must let their children know that Jordan was driven back before Israel, who
went through it upon dry land, and that this was the very place where they passed over. They
saw how deep and strong a stream Jordan now was, but the divine power put a stop to it,
even when it overflowed all its banks—"and this for you, that live so long after." Note, God's
mercies to our ancestors were mercies to us; and we should take all occasions to revive the
remembrance of the great things God did for our fathers in the days of old. The place thus
marked would be a memorandum to them: Israel came over this Jordan. A local memory
would be of use to them, and the sight of the place remind them of that which was done
there; and not only the inhabitants of that country, but strangers and travellers, would look
upon these stones and receive instruction. Many, upon the sight of the stones, would go to
their Bibles, and there read the history of this wondrous work; and some perhaps, upon
reading the history, though living at a distance, would have the curiosity to go and see the
stones.
2. They must take that occasion to tell their children of the drying up of the Red Sea
forty years before: As the Lord your God did to the Red Sea. Note. (1.) It greatly magnifies
later mercies to compare them with former mercies, for, by making the comparison, it appears
that god is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever. (2.) Later mercies should bring to re-
membrance former mercies, and revive our thankfulness for them.
45
