Chapter II
whom, though she was herself a housekeeper, she retained a due concern. 3. Her request
that they would swear unto her by Jehovah is an instance of her acquaintance with the only
true God, and her faith in him and devotion towards him, one act of which is religiously to
swear by his name. 4. Her petition is very just and reasonable, that, since she had protected
them, they should protect her, and since her kindness to them extended to their people, for
whom they were now negotiating, their kindness to her should take in all hers. It was the
least they could do for one that had saved their lives with the hazard of her own. Note, Those
that show mercy may expect to find mercy. Observe, She does not demand any preferment
by way of reward for her kindness to them, though they lay so much at her mercy that she
might have made her own terms, but only indents for her Life, which in a general destruction
would be a singular favour. Thus God promised Ebed-Melech, in recompence for his kindness
to Jeremiah, that in the worst of times he should have his life for a prey, Jer. xxxix. 18. Yet
this Rahab was afterwards advanced to be a princess in Israel, the wife of Salmon, and one
of the ancestors of Christ, Matt. i. 5. Those that faithfully serve Christ and suffer for him he
will not only protect, but prefer, and will do for them more than they are able to ask or think.
III. They solemnly engaged for her preservation in the common destruction (v. 14):
"Our life for yours. We will take as much care of your lives as of our own, and would as soon
hurt ourselves as any of you." Nay, they imprecate God's judgments on themselves if they
should violate their promise to her. She had pawned her life for theirs, and now they in re-
quital pawn their lives for hers, and (as public persons) with them they pawn the public
faith and the credit of their nation, for they plainly interest all Israel in the engagement in
those words, When the Lord has given us the land, meaning not themselves only, but the
people whose agents they were. No doubt they knew themselves sufficiently authorized to
treat with Rahab concerning this matter, and were confident that Joshua would ratify what
they did, else they had not dealt honestly; the general law that they should make no covenant
with the Canaanites (Deut. vii. 2) did not forbid them to take under their protection a par-
ticular person, that had heartily come into their interests and had done them real kindnesses.
The law of gratitude is one of the laws of nature. Now observe here, 1. The promises they
made her. In general, "We will deal kindly and truly with thee, v. 14. We will not only be
kind in promising now, but true in performing what we promise; and not only true in per-
forming just what we promise, but kind in out-doing thy demands and expectations." The
goodness of God is often expressed by his kindness and truth (Ps. cxvii. 2), and in both these
we must be followers of him. In particular, "If a hand be upon any in the house with thee,
his blood shall be on our head," v. 19. If hurt come through our carelessness to those whom
we are obliged to protect, we thereby contract guilt, and blood will be found a heavy load.
2. The provisos and limitations of their promises. Though they were in haste, and it may be
in some confusion, yet we find them very cautious in settling this agreement and the terms
of it, not to bind themselves to more than was fit for them to perform. Note, Covenants
27
Chapter II
must be made with care, and we must swear in judgment, lest we find ourselves perplexed
and entangled when it is too late after vows to make enquiry. Those that will be conscientious
in keeping their promises will be cautious in making them, and perhaps may insert conditions
which others may think frivolous. Their promise is here accompanied with three provisos,
and they were necessary ones. They will protect Rahab, and all her relations always, provided,
(1.) That she tie the scarlet cord with which she was now about to let them down in the
window of her house, v. 18. This was to be a mark upon the house, which the spies would
take care to give notice of to the camp of Israel, that no soldier, how hot and eager soever
he was in military executions, might offer any violence to the house that was thus distin-
guished. This was like the blood sprinkled upon the door-post, which secured the first-born
from the destroying angel, and, being of the same colour, some allude to this also to represent
the safety of believers under the protection of the blood of Christ sprinkled on the conscience.
The same cord that she made use of for the preservation of these Israelites was to be made
use of for her preservation. What we serve and honour God with we may expect he will bless
and make comfortable to us. (2.) That she should have all those whose safety she had desired
in the house with her and keep them there, and that, at the time of taking the town, none
of them should dare to stir out of doors, v. 18, 19. This was a necessary proviso, for Rahab's
kindred could not be distinguished any other way than by being in her distinguished house;
should they mingle with their neighbours, there was no remedy, but the sword would devour
one as well as another. It was a reasonable proviso that, since they were saved purely for
Rahab's sake, her house should have the honour of being their castle, and that, if they would
not perish with those that believed not, they should thus far believe the certainty and severity
of the ruin coming upon their city as to retire into a place made safe by promise, as Noah
into the ark and Lot into Zoar, and should save themselves from this untoward generation,
by separating from them. It was likewise a significant proviso, intimating to us that those
who are added to the church that they may be saved must keep close to the society of the
faithful, and, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, must take heed
of being again entangled therein. (3.) That she should keep counsel (v. 14, 20): If thou utter
this our business, that is, "If thou betray us when we are gone, or if thou make this agreement
public, so as that others tie scarlet lines in their windows and so confound us, then we will
be clear of thy oath." Those are unworthy of the secret of the Lord that know now how to
keep it to themselves when there is occasion.
IV. She then took effectual care to secure her new friends, and sent them out another
way, James ii. 25. Having fully understood the bargain they made with her, and consented
to it (v. 21), she then let them down by a cord over the city wall (v. 15), the situation of her
house befriending them herein: thus Paul made his escape out of Damascus, 2 Cor. xi. 33.
She also directed them which way to go for their own safety, being better acquainted with
the country than they were, v. 16. She directs them to leave the high road, and abscond in
28
Chapter II
the mountains till the pursuers returned, for till then they could not safely venture over
Jordan. Those that are in the way of God and their duty may expect that Providence will
protect them, but this will not excuse them from taking all prudent methods for their own
safety. God will keep us, but then we must not wilfully expose ourselves. Providence must
be trusted, but not tempted. Calvin thinks that their charge to Rahab to keep this matter
secret, and not to utter it, was intended for her safety, lest she, boasting of her security from
the sword of Israel, should, before they came to protect her, fall into the hands of the king
of Jericho and be put to death for treason: thus do they prudently advise her for her safety,
as she advised them for theirs. And it is good advice, which we should at any time be
thankful for, to take heed to ourselves.
22 And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three days, until the
pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them throughout all the way, but found
them not.   23 So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed
over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all things that befell them:   24 And
they said unto Joshua, Truly the Lord hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even
all the inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.
We have here the safe return of the spies Joshua had sent, and the great encouragement
they brought with them to Israel to proceed in their descent upon Canaan. Had they been
disposed to discourage the people, as the evil spies did that Moses sent, they might have told
them what they had observed of the height and strength of the walls of Jericho, and the ex-
traordinary vigilance of the king of Jericho, and how narrowly they escaped out of his hands;
but they were of another spirit, and, depending themselves upon the divine promise, they
animated Joshua likewise. 1. Their return in safety was itself an encouragement to Joshua,
and a token for good. That God provided for them so good a friend as Rahab was in an en-
emy's country, and that notwithstanding the rage of the king of Jericho and the eagerness
of the pursuers they had come back in peace, was such an instance of God's great care con-
cerning them for Israel's sake as might assure the people of the divine guidance and care
they were under, which should undoubtedly make the progress of their arms glorious. He
that so wonderfully protected their scouts would preserve their men of war, and cover their
heads in the day of battle. 2. The report they brought was much more encouraging (v. 24):
"All the inhabitants of the country, though resolved to stand it out, yet do faint because of
us, they have neither wisdom to yield nor courage to fight," whence they conclude, "Truly
the Lord has delivered into our hands all the land, it is all our own; we have nothing to do,
in effect, but to take possession." Sinners' frights are sometimes sure presages of their fall.
If we resist our spiritual enemies they will flee before us, which will encourage us to hope
that in due time we shall be more than conquerors.
29
Chapter III
Chapter III
J O S H U A
CHAP. III.
This chapter, and that which follows it, give us the history of Israel's passing through
Jordan into Canaan, and a very memorable history it is. Long afterwards, they are told to
remember what God did for them between Shittim (whence they decamped, ver. 1) and
Gilgal, where they next pitched, ch. iv. 19, Mic. vi. 5, that they might know the righteousness
of the Lord. By Joshua's order they marched up to the river's side, (ver. 1), and then almighty
power led them through it. They passed through the Red Sea unexpectedly, and in their
flight by night, but they have notice some time before of their passing through Jordan, and
their expectations raised. I. The people are directed to follow the ark, ver. 2-4. II. They are
commanded to sanctify themselves, ver. 5. III. The priests with the ark are ordered to lead
the van, ver. 6. IV. Joshua is magnified and made commander in chief, ver. 7, 8. V. Public
notice is given of what God is about to do for them, ver. 9-13. IV. The thing is done, Jordan
is divided, and Israel brought safely through it, ver. 14-17. This was the Lord's doing, and
it is marvellous in our eyes.
Preparation for Passing over the Jordan. (b. c. 1451.)
1 And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from Shittim, and came to
Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over.   2 And
it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through the host;   3 And they com-
manded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, and
the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after it.   4
Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: come
not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go: for ye have not passed this
way heretofore.   5 And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow the
Lord will do wonders among you.   6 And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up
the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of the
covenant, and went before the people.
Rahab, in mentioning to the spies the drying up of the Red Sea (ch. ii. 10), the report of
which terrified the Canaanites more than anything else, intimates that those on that side
the water expected that Jordan, that great defence of their country, would in like manner
give way to them. Whether the Israelites had any expectation of it does not appear. God
often did things for them which they looked not for, Isa. lxiv. 3. Now here we are told,
I. That they came to Jordan and lodged there, v. 1. Though they were not yet told how
they should pass the river, and were unprovided for the passing of it in any ordinary way,
yet they went forward in faith, having been told (ch. i. 11) that they should pass it. We must
go on in the way of our duty though we foresee difficulties, trusting God to help us through
them when we come to them. Let us proceed as far as we can, and depend on divine suffi-
30
Chapter III
ciency for that which we find ourselves not sufficient for. In this march Joshua led them,
and particular notice is taken of his early rising as there is afterwards upon other occasions
(ch. vi. 12; vii. 16; viii. 10), which intimates how little he loved his ease, how much he loved
his business, and what care and pains he was willing to take in it. Those that would bring
great things to pass must rise early. Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty. Joshua herein
set a good example to the officers under him, and taught them to rise early, and to all that
are in public stations especially to attend continually to the duty of their place.
II. That the people were directed to follow the ark. Officers were appointed to go through
the host to give these directions (v. 2), that every Israelite might know both what to do and
what to depend upon.
1. They might depend upon the ark to lead them; that is, upon God himself, of whose
presence the ark was an instituted sign and token. It seems, the pillar of cloud and fire was
removed, else that would have led them, unless we suppose that it now hovered over the
ark and so they had a double guide: honour was put upon the ark, and a defence upon that
glory. It is called here the ark of the covenant of the Lord their God. What greater encourage-
ment could they have than this, that the Lord was their God, a God in covenant with them?
Here was the ark of the covenant; if God be ours, we need not fear any evil. He was nigh to
them, present with them, went before them: what could come amiss to those that were thus
guided, thus guarded? Formerly the ark was carried in the midst of the camp, but now it
went before them to search out a resting-place for them (Num. x. 33), and, as it were, to give
them livery and seisin of the promised land, and put them in possession of it. In the ark the
tables of the law were, and over it the mercy-seat; for the divine law and grace reigning in
the heart are the surest pledges of God's presence and favour, and those that would be led
to the heavenly Canaan must take the law of God for their guide (if thou wilt enter into life
keep the commandments) and have the great propitiation in their eye, looking for the mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
2. They might depend upon the priests and Levites, who were appointed for that purpose
to carry the ark before them. The work of ministers is to hold forth the word of life, and to
take care of the administration of those ordinances which are the tokens of God's presence
and the instruments of his power and grace; and herein they must go before the people of
God in their way to heaven.
3. The people must follow the ark: Remove from your place and go after it, (1.) As those
that are resolved never to forsake it. Wherever God's ordinances are, there we must be; if
they flit, we must remove and go after them. (2.) As those that are entirely satisfied in its
guidance, that it will lead in the best way to the best end; and therefore, Lord, I will follow
thee whithersoever thou goest. This must be all their care, to attend the motions of the ark,
and follow it with an implicit faith. Thus must we walk after the rule of the word and the
direction of the Spirit in every thing, so shall peace be upon us, as it now was upon the Israel
31
Chapter III
of God. They must follow the priests as far as they carried the ark, but no further; so we
must follow our ministers only as they follow Christ.
4. In following the ark, they must keep their distance, v. 4. They must none of them come
within a thousand yards of the ark. (1.) They must thus express their awful and reverent
regard to that token of God's presence, lest its familiarity with them should breed contempt.
This charge to them not to come near was agreeable to that dispensation of darkness,
bondage, and terror: but we now through Christ have access with boldness. (2.) Thus it was
made to appear that the ark was able to protect itself, and needed not to be guarded by the
men of war, but was itself a guard to them. With what a noble defiance of the enemy did it
leave all it its friends half a mile behind except the unarmed priests that carried it as perfectly
sufficient for its own safety and theirs that followed it! (3.) Thus it was the better seen by
those that were to be led by it: That you may know the way by which you must go, seeing it,
as it were, chalked out or tracked by the ark. Had they been allowed to come near it, they
would have surrounded it, and none would have had the sight of it but those that were close
to it; but, as it was put at such a distance before them, they would all have the satisfaction
of seeing it, and would be animated by the sight. And it was with good reason that this
provision was made for their encouragement: For you have not passed this way heretofore.
This had been the character of all their way through the wilderness, it was an untrodden
path, but this especially through Jordan. While we are here we must expect and prepare for
unusual events, to pass ways that we have not passed before, and much more when we go
hence; our way through the valley of the shadow of death is a way we have not gone before,
which makes it the more formidable. But, if we have the assurance of God's presence, we
need not fear; that will furnish us with such strength as we never had when we come to do
a work we never did.
III. They were commanded to sanctify themselves, that they might be prepared to attend
the ark; and with good reason: For to-morrow the Lord will do wonders among you, v. 5. See
how magnificently he speaks of God's works: he doeth wonders, and is therefore to be adored,
admired, and trusted in. See how intimately acquainted Joshua was with the divine counsels:
he could tell before-hand what god would do, and when. See what preparation we must
make to receive the discoveries of God's glory and the communications of his grace: we
must sanctify ourselves. This we must do when we are to attend the ark, and God by it is
about to do wonders among us; we must separate ourselves from all other cares, devote
ourselves to God's honour, and cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. The
people of Israel were now entering into the holy land, and therefore must sanctify themselves.
God was about to give them uncommon instances of his favour, which by meditation and
prayer they must compose their minds to a very careful observation of, that they might give
God the glory, and take to themselves the comfort, of these appearances.
32
Chapter III
IV. The priests were ordered to take up the ark and carry it before the people, v. 6. It was
the Levites' work ordinarily to carry the ark, Num. iv. 15. But on this great occasion the
priests were ordered to do it. And they did as they were commanded, took up the ark, and
did not think themselves disparaged, went before the people, and did not think themselves
exposed; the ark they carried was both their honour and their defence. And now we may
suppose that prayer of Moses used, when the ark set forward (Num. x. 35), Rise up, Lord
and let they enemies be scattered. Magistrates are here instructed to stir up ministers to their
work, and to make use of their authority for the furtherance of religion. Ministers must
likewise learn to go before in the way of God, and not to shrink nor draw back when dangers
are before them. They must expect to be most struck at, but they know whom they have
trusted.
7 And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of
all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.   8 And thou
shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye are come to
the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan.   9 And Joshua said unto the
children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of the Lord your God.   10 And Joshua
said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that he will without fail
drive out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites,
and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.   11 Behold, the ark of the covenant
of the Lord of all the earth passeth over before you into Jordan.   12 Now therefore take you
twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man.   13 And it shall come to pass,
as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the
earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be cut off from the
waters that come down from above; and they shall stand upon a heap.
We may observe here how God honours Joshua, and by this wondrous work he is about
to do designs to make Israel know that he is their governor, and then how Joshua honours
God and endeavours by it to make Israel know that he is their God. Thus those that honour
God he will honour, and those whom he has advanced should do what they can in their
places to exalt him.
I. God speaks to Joshua to put honour upon him, v. 7, 8. 1. It was a great honour God
did him that he spoke to him as he had done to Moses from off the mercy-seat, before the
priests removed it with the ark. This would make Joshua easy in himself and great among
the people, that God was pleased to speak so familiarly to him. 2. That he designed to mag-
nify him in the sight of all Israel. He had told him before that he would be with him (ch. i.
5), and that comforted him, but now all Israel shall see it, and this would magnify him.
Those are truly great with whom God is and whom he employs and owns in his service.
God magnified him because he would have the people magnify him. Pious magistrates are
to be highly honoured and esteemed as public blessings, and the more we see of God with
33
Chapter III
them the more we should honour them. By the dividing of the Red Sea Israel was convinced
that God was with Moses in bringing them out of Egypt; therefore they are said to be baptized
unto Moses in the sea, 1 Cor. x. 2. And upon that occasion they believed him, Exod. xiv. 31.
And now, by the dividing of Jordan, they shall be convinced that God is in like manner with
Joshua in bringing them into Canaan. God had magnified Joshua before on several occasions,
but now he began to magnify him as the successor of Moses in the government. Some have
observed that it was at the banks of Jordan that God began to magnify Joshua, and at the
same place he began to magnify our Lord Jesus as Mediator; for John was baptizing at
Bethabara, the house of passage, and there it was that when our Saviour was baptized it was
proclaimed concerning him, This is my beloved Son. 3. That by him he gave orders to the
priests themselves, though they were his immediate attendants (v. 8): Thou shalt command
the priests, that is, "Thou shalt make known to them the divine command in this matter,
and take care that they observe it, to stand still at the brink of Jordan while the waters part,
that it may appear to be at the presence of the Lord, of the mighty God of Jacob, that Jordan
is driven back," Ps. cxiv. 5, 7. God could have divided the river without the priests, but they
could not without him. The priests must herein set a good example to the people, and teach
them to do their utmost in the service of God, and trust him for help in time of need.
II. Joshua speaks to the people, and therein honours God.
1. He demands attention (v. 9): "Come hither to me, as many as can come within hearing,
and, before you see the works, hear the words of the Lord your God, that you may compare
them together and they may illustrate each other." He had commanded them to sanctify
themselves, and therefore calls them to hear the word of God, for that is the ordinary means
of sanctification, John xvii. 17.
2. He now tells them, at length, by what way they should pass over Jordan, by the stopping
of its streams (v. 13): The waters of Jordan shall be cut off. God could by a sudden and mira-
culous frost have congealed the surface, so that they might all have gone over upon the ice;
but that being a thing sometimes done even in that country by the ordinary power of nature
(Job xxxviii. 30), it would not have been such an honour to Israel's God, nor such a terror
to Israel's enemies; it must therefore be done in such a way as had no precedent but the di-
viding of the Red Sea: and that miracle is here repeated, to show that God has the same
power to finish the salvation of his people that he had to begin it, for he is the Alpha and
the Omega; and that the word of the Lord (as the Chaldee reads it, v. 7), the essential, eternal
Word, was as truly with Joshua as he was with Moses. And by the dividing of the waters
from the waters, and the making of the dry land to appear which had been covered, God
would remind them of that in which Moses by revelation had instructed them concerning
the work of creation (Gen. i. 6, 9), that by what they now saw their belief of that which they
there read might be assisted, and they might know that the God whom they worshipped
34
