Chapter I 1846
Chapter II 1851
Chapter III 1858
Chapter IV 1863
Chapter V 1870
Chapter VI 1878
Chapter VII 1885
Chapter VIII 1891
Chapter IX 1899
Chapter X 1910
Chapter XI 1916
Chapter XII 1921
Chapter XIII 1927
Esther 1938
Introduction 1938
Chapter I 1940
Chapter II 1946
Chapter III 1952
Chapter IV 1958
Chapter V 1964
Chapter VI 1969
Chapter VII 1975
Chapter VIII 1980
Chapter IX 1986
Chapter X 1995
Indexes 1997
Index of Scripture References 1998
Index of Scripture Commentary 2024
Index of Pages of the Print Edition 2027
x
This PDF file is from the Christian Classics Ethereal Library, www.ccel.org. The mission of
the CCEL is to make classic Christian books available to the world.
• This book is available in PDF, HTML, ePub, Kindle, and other formats. See
http://www.ccel.org/ccel/henry/mhc2.html.
• Discuss this book online at http://www.ccel.org/node/3129.
The CCEL makes CDs of classic Christian literature available around the world through the
Web and through CDs. We have distributed thousands of such CDs free in developing
countries. If you are in a developing country and would like to receive a free CD, please
send a request by email to cd-request@ccel.org.
The Christian Classics Ethereal Library is a self supporting non-profit organization at
Calvin College. If you wish to give of your time or money to support the CCEL, please visit
http://www.ccel.org/give.
This PDF file is copyrighted by the Christian Classics Ethereal Library. It may be freely
copied for non-commercial purposes as long as it is not modified. All other rights are re-
served. Written permission is required for commercial use.
xi
Title Page
Title Page
Matthew Henry's
Commentary on the Whole Bible
Unabridged
 
Volume 2
Joshua to Esther
1
Preface: Joshua to Esther
Preface: Joshua to Esther
P R E F A C E.
iii
Joshua to Esther
This second volume of methodized and practical expositions of the inspired writings
ventures abroad with fear and trembling in the same plain and homely dress with the former
on the Pentateuch. Ornari res ipsa negat; contenta doceri—the subject requires no ornament;
to have it apprehended is all. But I trust, through grace, it proceeds from the same honest
design to promote the knowledge of the scripture, in order to the reforming of men's hearts
and lives. If I may but be instrumental to make my readers wise and good, wiser and better,
more watchful against sin and more careful of their duty both to God and man, and, in order
thereto, more in love with the word and law of God, I have all I desire, all I aim at. May he
that ministereth seed to the sower multiply the seed sown, by increasing the fruits of our
righteousness, 2 Cor. ix. 10. It is the history of the Jewish church and nation that fills this
volume, from their first settlement in the promised land, after their 430 years' bondage in
Egypt and their forty years' wandering in the wilderness, to their re-settlement there after
their seventy years' captivity in Babylon—from Joshua to Nehemiah. The five books of
Moses were taken up more with their laws, institutes, and charters; but all these books are
purely historical, and in this way of writing a great deal of very valuable learning and wisdom
has been conveyed from one generation to another. The chronology of this history, and the
ascertaining of the times when the several events contained in it happened, would very much
illustrate the history, and add to the brightness of it; it is therefore well worthy the search
of the curious and ingenious, and they may find both pleasure and profit in perusing the
labours of many learned men who have directed their studies that way. I confess I could
willingly have entertained myself and reader, in this preface, with a calculation of the times
through which this history passes; but I consider that such a babe in knowledge as I am
could not pretend either to add to or correct what has been done by so many great writers,
much less to decide the controversies that have been agitated among them. I had indeed
some thoughts of consulting my worthy and ever-honoured friend Mr. Tallents of Shrews-
bury, the learned author of the "View of Universal History," and of begging some advice
and assistance from him in methodizing the contents of this history; but, in the very week
in which I put my last hand to this part, it pleased God to put an end to his useful life (and
useful it was to the last) and to call him to his rest, in the eighty-ninth year of his age: so
that purpose was broken off, that thought of my heart. But that elaborate performance of
his commonly called his "Chronological Tables" gives great light to this, as indeed to all
other parts of history. And Dr. Lightfoot's "Chronology of the Old Testament," and Mr.
Cradock's "History of the Old Testament Methodized," may also be of great use to such
readers as I write for. As to the particular chronological difficulties which occur in the thread
of this history, I have not been large upon them, because many times I could not satisfy
2
Preface: Joshua to Esther
myself, and how then could I satisfy my reader concerning them? I have not indeed met
with any difficulties so great but that solutions might be given of them sufficient to silence
the atheists and antiscripturists, and roll away from the sacred records all the reproach of
contradiction and inconsistency with themselves; for, to do that, it is enough to show that
the difference may be accommodated either this way or that, when at the same time one
cannot satisfy one's self which way is the right. But it is well that these are things about which
we may very safely and very comfortably be ignorant and unresolved. What concerns our
salvation is plain enough, and we need not perplex ourselves about the niceties of chronology,
genealogy, or chorography. At least my undertaking leads me not into those labyrinths.
What is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness,
is what I intend to observe, and I would endeavour to open what is dark and hard to be
understood only in order to that. Every author must be taken in his way of writing; the
sacred penman, as they have not left us formal systems, so they have not left us formal annals,
but useful narratives of things proper for our direction in the way of duty, which some great
judges of common writers have thought to be the most pleasant and profitable histories,
and most likely to answer the end. The word of God manifestis pascit, obscuris exercet (Aug.
in Joh. Tract. 45), as one of the ancients expresses it, that is, it has enough in it that is easy
to nourish the meanest to life eternal, yet enough that is difficult to try the industry and hu-
mility of the greatest. There are several things which should recommend this part of sacred
writ to our diligent and constant search.
I. That it is history, and therefore entertaining and very pleasant, edifying and very ser-
viceable to the conduct of human life. It gratifies the inquisitive with the knowledge of that
which the most intense speculation could not discover any other way. By a retirement into
ourselves, and a serious contemplation of the objects we are surrounded with, close reasoning
may advance many excellent truths without being beholden to any other. But for the
knowledge of past events we are entirely indebted (and must be so) to the reports and records
of others. A notion or hypothesis of man's own framing may gain him the reputation of a
wit, but a history of man's own framing will lay him under the reproach of a cheat any further
than as it respects that which he himself is an eye or ear-witness of. How much are we in-
debted then to the divine wisdom and goodness for these writings, which have made things
so long since past as familiar to us as any of the occurrences of the age and place we live in!
History is so edifying that parables and apologues have been invented to make up the defi-
ciencies of it for our instruction concerning good and evil; and, whatever may be said of
other history, we are sure that in this history there is no matter of fact recorded but what
has its use and will help either to expound God's providence or guide man's prudence.
II. That it is true history, and what we may rely upon the credit of, and need not fear
being deceived in. That which the heathens reckoned tempus adelon (which they knew
nothing at all of) and tempus mythikon (the account of which was wholly fabulous) is to us
3
Preface: Joshua to Esther
tempus historikon, what we have a most authentic account of. The Greeks were with them
the most celebrated historians, and yet their successors in learning and dominion, the Ro-
mans, put them into no good name for their credibility, witness that of the poet: Et quicquid
Græcia mendax audet in historia—All that lying Greece has dared to record, Juv. Sat. 10.
But the history which we have before us is of undoubted certainty, and no cunningly devised
fable. To be well assured of this is a great satisfaction, especially since we meet with so many
things in it truly miraculous, and many more great and marvellous.
III. That it is ancient history, far more ancient than was ever pretended to come from
any other hand. Homer the most ancient genuine heathen writer now entirely extant, is
reckoned to have lived at the beginning of the Olympiads, near the time when it is computed
that the city of Rome was founded by Romulus, which was but about the reign of Hezekiah
king of Judah. And his writings pretend not to be historical, but poetical fiction all over:
rhapsodies indeed they are, and the very Alcoran of paganism. The most ancient authentic
historians now extant are Herodotus and Thucydides, who were contemporaries with the
latest of our historians, Ezra and Nehemiah, and could not write with any certainty of events
much before their own time. The obscurity, deficiency, and uncertainty of all ancient history,
except that which we find in the scripture, is abundantly made out by the learned bishop
Stillingfleet, in that most useful book, his Origines Sacræ, lib. i. Let the antiquity of this history
not only recommend it to the curious, but recommend to us all that way of religion it directs
us in, as the good old way, in which if we walk we shall find rest for our souls, Jer. vi. 16.
IV. That it is church history, the history of the Jewish church, that sacred society, incor-
porated for religion, and the custody of the oracles and ordinances of God, by a charter
under the broad seal of heaven, a covenant confirmed by miracles. Many great and mighty
nations there were at this time in the world, celebrated it is likely for wisdom, and learning,
and valour, illustrious men and illustrious actions; yet the records of them are all lost, either
in silence or fables, while that little inconsiderable people of the Jews that dwelt alone, and
was not reckoned among the nations (Num. xxiii. 9), makes so great a figure in the best
known, most ancient, and most lasting of all histories; and no notice is taken in it of the affairs
of other nations, except only as they fall in with the affairs of the Jews: for the Lord's portion
is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance, Deut. xxxii. 8, 9. Such a concern has God for
his church in every age, and so dear have its interests been to him. Let them therefore be so
to us, that we may be followers of him as dear children.
V. That it is a divine history, given by inspiration of God, and a part of that blessed book
which is to be the standing rule of our faith and practice. And we are not to think it a part
of it which might have been spared, or which we may now pass over or cast a careless eye
upon, as if it were indifferent whether we read it or no; but we are to read it as a sacred record,
preserved for our benefit on whom the ends of the world have come. 1. This history is of great
use for the understanding of some parts of the Old Testament. The account we have here
4
Preface: Joshua to Esther
of David's life and reign, and especially of his troubles, is a key to many of his Psalms; and
much light is given to most of the prophecies by these histories. 2. Though we have not al-
together so many types of Christ here as we had in the history and the law of Moses, yet
even here we meet with many who were figures of him that was to come, such as Joshua,
Samson, Solomon, Cyrus, but especially David, whose kingdom was typical of the kingdom
of the Messiah and the covenant of royalty made with him, a dark representation of the
covenant of redemption made with the eternal Word; nor know we how to call Christ the
son of David unless we be acquainted with this history nor how to receive the declaration
that John Baptist was the Elias that was to come, Mt. xi. 14. 3. The state of the Jewish church
which is here set before us was typical of the gospel church and the state of that in the days
of the Messiah; and as the prophecies which related to it looked further to the latter days,
so did the histories of it; and still these things happened to them for ensamples, 1 Cor. x. 11.
By the tenour of this history we are given to understand these three things concerning the
church (for the thing that hath been is that which shall be, Eccl. i. 9):—(1.) That we are not
to expect the perfect purity and unity of the church in this world, and therefore not to be
stumbled, though we are grieved, at its corruptions, distempers, and divisions; we are not
to think it strange concerning them, as though some strange thing happened, much less to
think the worse of its laws and constitutions for the sake of them or to despair of its perpetu-
ity. What wretched stains of idolatry, impiety, and immorality, appear on the Jewish church,
and what a woeful breach was there between Judah and Ephraim! yet God took them (as I
may say) with all their faults, and never wholly rejected them till they rejected the Messiah.
Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah, of their God, though their land was filled with sin
against the Holy One of Israel, Jer. li. 5. (2.) That we are not to expect the constant tranquillity
and prosperity of the church. It was then often oppressed and afflicted from its youth, had
its years of servitude as well as its days of triumph, was often obscured, diminished, impov-
erished, and brought low; and yet still God secured to himself a remnant, a holy seed, which
was the substance thereof, Isa. vi. 13. Let us not then be surprised to see the gospel church
sometimes under hatches, and driven into the wilderness, and the gates of hell prevailing
far against it. (3.) That yet we need not fear the utter extirpation of it. The gospel church is
called the Israel of God (Gal. vi. 16), and the Jerusalem which is above (Gal. iv. 26), the
heavenly Jerusalem; for as Israel after the flesh, and the Jerusalem that then was, by the
wonderful care of the divine Providence, outrode all the storms with which they were tossed
and threatened, and continued in being till they were made to resign all their honours to
the gospel church, which they were the figures of, so shall that also, notwithstanding all its
shocks, be preserved, till the mystery of God shall be finished, and the kingdom of grace
shall have its perfection in the kingdom of glory. 4. This history is of great use to us for our
direction in the way of our duty; it was written for our learning, that we may see the evil we
should avoid and be armed against it, and the good we should do and be quickened to it.
5
Preface: Joshua to Esther
Though they are generally judges, and kings, and great men, whose lives are here written,
yet in them even those of the meanest rank may see the deformity of sin and hate it, and the
beauty of holiness and be in love with it; nay, the greater the person is the more evident are
both these; for, if the great be good, it is their goodness that makes their greatness honourable;
if bad, their greatness does but make their badness the more shameful. The failings even of
good people are also recorded here for our admonition, that he who thinks he stands may
take heed lest he fall, and that he who has fallen may not despair of forgiveness if he recover
himself by repentance. 5. This history, as it shows what God requires of us, so it shows what
we may expect from his providence, especially concerning states and kingdoms. By the
dealings of God with the Jewish nation it appears that, as nations are, so they must expect
to fare—that while princes and people serve the interests of God's kingdom among men he
will secure and advance their interests, but that when they shake off his government, and
rebel against him, they can look for no other than an inundation of judgments. It was so all
along with Israel; while they kept close to God they prospered; when they forsook him every
thing went cross. That great man archbishop Tillotson (Vol. 1. Serm. 3. on Prov. xiv. 34)
suggests that though, as to particular persons, the providences of God are promiscuously
administered in this world, because there is another world of rewards and punishments for
them, yet it is not so with nations as such, but national virtues are ordinarily rewarded with
temporal blessings and national sins punished with temporal judgments, because, as he says,
public bodies and communities of men, as such, can be rewarded and punished only in this
world, for in the next they will all be dissolved. So plainly are God's ways of disposing
kingdoms laid before us in the glass of this history that I could wish Christian statesmen
would think themselves as much concerned as preachers to acquaint themselves with it;
they might fetch as good maxims of state and rules of policy from this as from the best of
the Greek and Roman historians. We are blessed (as the Jews were) with a divine revelation,
and make a national profession of religion and relation to God, and therefore are to look
upon ourselves as in a peculiar manner under a divine regimen, so that the things which
happened to them were designed for ensamples to us.
I cannot pretend to write for great ones. But if what is here done may be delightful to
any in reading and helpful in understanding and improving this sacred history, and governing
themselves by the dictates of it, let God have all the glory and let all the rivers return to the
ocean whence they came. When I look back on what is done I see nothing to boast of, but
a great deal to be ashamed of; and, when I look forward on what is to be done, I see nothing
in myself to trust to for the doing of it. I have no sufficiency of my own; but by the grace of
God I am what I am, and that grace will, I trust, be sufficient for me. Surely in the Lord have
I righteousness and strength. That blessed epichoregia which the apostle speaks of (Phil. i.
19), that continual supply or communication of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, is what we may in
faith pray for, and depend upon, to furnish us for every good word and work. The pleasant-
6
Preface: Joshua to Esther
ness of the study has drawn me on to the writing of this, and the candour with which my
friends have been pleased to receive my poor endeavours on the Pentateuch encourages me
to publish it; it is done according to the best of my skill, not without some care and applica-
tion of mind, in the same method and manner with that; I wish I could have done it in less
compass, that it might have been more within reach of the poor of the flock. But then it would
not have been so plain and full as I desire it may be for the benefit of the lambs of the flock.
Brevis esse laboro, obscurus fio—labouring to be concise I become obscure. With a humble
submission to the divine providence and its disposals, and a humble reliance on the divine
grace and its guidance and operation, I purpose still to proceed, as I have time, in this work.
Two volumes more will, if God permit, conclude the Old Testament; and then if my friends
encourage me, and my God spare me and enable me for it, I intend to go on to the New
Testament. For though many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those
parts of scripture which are yet before us (Luke i. 1), whose works praise them in the gates
and are likely to outlive mine, yet while the subject is really so copious as it is and the manner
of handling it may possibly be so various, and while one book comes into the hands of some
and another into the hands of others, and all concur in the same design to advance the
common interests of Christ's kingdom, the common faith once delivered to the saints, and
the common salvation of precious souls (Tit. i. 4; Jude 3), I hope store of this kind will be
thought no sore. I make bold to mention my purpose to proceed thus publicly in hopes I
may have the advice of my friends in it, and their prayers for me that I may be made more
ready and mighty in the scriptures, that understanding and utterance may be given to me,
and that I may obtain mercy of the Lord Jesus to be found his faithful servant, who am less
than the least of all that call him Master.
M. H.      
            Chester,
      June 2, 1708.
7
Joshua
IntroductionJoshua
Joshua
AN
1
EXPOSITION,
W I T H   P R A C T I C A L   O B S E R V A T I O N S,
OF THE BOOK OF
J O S H U A.
I. We have now before us the history of the Jewish nation in this book and those that
follow it to the end of the book of Esther. These books, to the end of the books of the Kings,
the Jewish writers call the first book of the prophets, to bring them within the distribution
of the books of the Old Testament, into the Law, the Prophets, and the Chetubim, or Hagi-
ographa, Luke xxiv. 44. The rest they make part of the Hagiographa. For, though history is
their subject, it is justly supposed that prophets were their penmen. To those books that are
purely and properly prophetical the name of the prophet is prefixed, because the credibility
of the prophecies depended much upon the character of the prophets; but these historical
books, it is probable, were collections of the authentic records of the nation, which some of
the prophets (and the Jewish church was for many ages more or less continually blessed
with such) were divinely directed and helped to put together for the service of the church
to the end of the world; as their other officers, so their historiographers, had their authority
from heaven.—It should seem that though the substance of the several histories was written
when the events were fresh in memory, and written under a divine direction, yet, under the
same direction, they were put into the form in which we now have them by some other
hand, long afterwards, probably all by the same hand, or about the same time. The grounds
of the conjecture are, 1. Because former writings are so often referred to, as the Book of
Jasher (Josh. x. 13, and 2 Sam. i. 18), the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and
the books of Gad, Nathan, and Iddo. 2. Because the days when the things were done are
spoken of sometimes as days long since passed; as 1 Sam. ix. 9, He that is now called a
prophet was formerly called a seer. And, 3. Because we so often read of things remaining
unto this day; as stones (Josh. iv. 9; vii. 26; viii. 29; x. 27; 1 Sam. vi. 18), names of places (Josh.
v. 9; vii. 26; Judg. i. 26; xv. 19; xviii. 12; 2 Kings xiv. 7), rights and possessions (Judg. i. 21; 1
Sam. xxvii. 6), customs and usages (1 Sam. v. 5; 2 Kings xvii. 41), which clauses have been
since added to the history by the inspired collectors for the confirmation and illustration of
it to those of their own age. And, if one may offer a mere conjecture, it is not unlikely that
the historical books, to the end of the Kings, were put together by Jeremiah the prophet, a
little before the captivity; for it is said of Ziklag (1 Sam. xxvii. 6) that it pertains to the kings
8
