Chapter XIV
less is blessed of the better. Hebron was settled on Caleb and his heirs (v. 14), because he
wholly followed the Lord God of Israel. And happy are we if we follow him. Note, Singular
piety shall be crowned with singular favours. Now, 1. We are here told what Hebron had
been, the city of Arba, a great man among the Anakim (v. 15); we find it called Kirjath-arba
(Gen. xxiii. 2), as the place where Sarah died. Hereabouts Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob lived
most of their time in Canaan, and near to it was the cave of Machpelah, where they were
buried, which perhaps had led Caleb hither when he went to spy out the land, and had made
him covet this rather than any other part for his inheritance. 2. We are afterwards told what
Hebron was. (1.) It was one of the cities belonging to priests (Josh. xxi. 13), and a city of
refuge, Josh. xx. 7. When Caleb had it, he contented himself with the country about it, and
cheerfully gave the city to the priests, the Lord's ministers, thinking it could not be better
bestowed, no, not upon his own children, nor that it was the less his own for being thus
devoted to God. (2.) It was a royal city, and, in the beginning of David's reign, the metropolis
of the kingdom of Judah; thither the people resorted to him, and there he reigned seven
years. Thus highly was Caleb's city honoured; it is a pity there should have been such a
blemish upon his family long after as Nabal was, who was of the house of Caleb, 1 Sam. xxv.
3. But the best men cannot entail their virtues.
143
Chapter XV
Chapter XV
J O S H U A
CHAP. XV.
Though the land was not completely conquered, yet being (as was said in the close of
the foregoing chapter) as rest from war for the present, and their armies all drawn out of
the field to a general rendezvous at Gilgal, there they began to divide the land, though the
work was afterwards perfected at Shiloh, ch. xviii. 1, &c. In this chapter we have the lot of
the tribe of Judah, which in this, as in other things, had the precedency. I. The borders or
bounds of the inheritance of Judah, ver. 1-12. II. The particular assignment of Hebron and
the country thereabout to Caleb and his family, ver. 13-19. III. The names of the several
cities that fell within Judah's lot, ver. 20-63.
The Lot of Judah. (b. c. 1444.)
1 This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families; even to the
border of Edom the wilderness of Zin southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.
  2 And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from the bay that looketh
southward:   3 And it went out to the south side to Maaleh-acrabbim, and passed along to
Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadesh-barnea, and passed along to Hezron,
and went up to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa:   4 From thence it passed toward
Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out of that coast were at the
sea: this shall be your south coast.   5 And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end
of Jordan. And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at the uttermost
part of Jordan:   6 And the border went up to Beth-hogla, and passed along by the north of
Beth-arabah; and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben:   7 And the
border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward, looking toward
Gilgal, that is before the going up to Adummim, which is on the south side of the river: and
the border passed toward the waters of En-shemesh, and the goings out thereof were at En-
rogel:   8 And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the south side of
the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went up to the top of the mountain that
lieth before the valley of Hinnom westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants
northward:   9 And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the fountain of the
water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron; and the border was drawn
to Baalah, which is Kirjath-jearim:   10 And the border compassed from Baalah westward
unto mount Seir, and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on
the north side, and went down to Beth-shemesh, and passed on to Timnah:   11 And the
border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the border was drawn to Shicron,
and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the
border were at the sea.   12 And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof.
This is the coast of the children of Judah round about according to their families.
144
Chapter XV
Judah and Joseph were the two sons of Jacob on whom Reuben's forfeited birth-right
devolved. Judah had the dominion entailed on him, and Joseph the double portion, and
therefore these two tribes were first seated, Judah in the southern part of the land of Canaan
and Joseph in the northern part, and on them the other seven did attend, and had their re-
spective lots as appurtenances to these two; the lots of Benjamin, Simeon, and Dan, were
appendant to Judah, and those of Issachar and Zebulun, Naphtali and Asher, to Joseph.
These two were first set up to be provided for, it should seem, before there was such an exact
survey of the land as we find afterwards, ch. xviii. 9. It is probable that the most considerable
parts of the northern and southern countries, and those that lay nearest to Gilgal, and which
the people were best acquainted with, were first put into two portions, and the lot was cast
upon them between these two principal tribes, of the one of which Joshua was, and of the
other Caleb, who was the first commissioner in this writ of partition; and, by the decision
of that lot, the southern country, of which we have an account in this chapter, fell to Judah,
and the northern, of which we have an account in the two following chapters, to Joseph.
And when this was done there was a more equal dividend (either in quantity or quality) of
the remainder among the seven tribes. And this, probably, was intended in that general rule
which was given concerning this partition (Num. xxxiii. 54), to the more you shall give the
more inheritance, and to the fewer you shall give the less, and every man's inheritance shall
be where his lot falleth; that is, "You shall appoint two greater portions which shall be determ-
ined by lot to those more numerous tribes of Judah and Joseph, and then the rest shall be
less portions to be allotted to the less numerous tribes." The former was done in Gilgal, the
latter in Shiloh.
In these verses, we have the borders of the lot of Judah, which, as the rest, is said to be
by their families, that is, with an eye to the number of their families. And it intimates that
Joshua and Eleazar, and the rest of the commissioners, when they had by lot given each tribe
its portion, did afterwards (it is probable by lot likewise) subdivide those larger portions,
and assign to each family its inheritance, and then to each household, which would be better
done by this supreme authority, and be apt to give less disgust than if it had been left to the
inferior magistrates of each tribe to make that distribution. The borders of this tribe are
here largely fixed, yet not unalterably, for a good deal of that which lies within these bounds
was afterwards assigned to the lots of Simeon and Dan. 1. The eastern border was all, and
only, the Salt Sea, v. 5. Every sea is salt, but this was of an extraordinary and more than
natural saltness, the effects of that fire and brimstone with which Sodom and Gomorrah
were destroyed in Abraham's time, whose ruins lie buried in the bottom of this dead water,
which never either was moved itself or had any living thing in it. 2. The southern border
was that of the land of Canaan in general, as will appear by comparing v. 1-4 with Num.
xxxiv. 3-5. So that this powerful and warlike tribe of Judah guarded the frontiers of the whole
land, on that side which lay towards their old sworn enemies (though their two fathers were
145
Chapter XV
twin-brethren), the Edomites. Our Lord therefore, who sprang out of Judah, and whose the
kingdom is, shall judge the mount of Esau, Obad. 21. 3. The northern border divided it from
the lot of Benjamin. In this, mention is made of the stone of Bohan a Reubenite (v. 6), who
probably was a great commander of those forces of Reuben that came over Jordan, and died
in the camp at Gilgal, and was buried not far off under this stone. The valley of Achor likewise
lies upon this border (v. 7), to remind the men of Judah of the trouble which Achan, one of
their tribe, gave to the congregation of Israel, that they might not be too much lifted up with
their services. This northern line touched closely upon Jerusalem (v. 8), so closely as to include
in the lot of this tribe Mount Zion and Mount Moriah, though the greater part of the city
lay in the lot of Benjamin. 4. The west border went near to the great sea at first (v. 12), but
afterwards the lot of the tribe of Dan took off a good part of Judah's lot on that side; for the
lot was only to determine between Judah and Joseph, which should have the north and
which the south, and not immovably to fix the border of either. Judah's inheritance had its
boundaries determined. Though it was a powerful warlike tribe, and had a great interest in
the other tribes, yet they must not therefore be left to their own choice, to enlarge their
possessions at pleasure, but must live so as that their neighbours might live by them. Those
that are placed high yet must not think to be placed alone in the midst of the earth.
Caleb's Inheritance. (b. c. 1444.)
13 And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the children of Judah,
according to the commandment of the Lord to Joshua, even the city of Arba the father of
Anak, which city is Hebron.   14 And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai,
and Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.   15 And he went up thence to the inhabitants
of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjath-sepher.   16 And Caleb said, He that
smiteth Kirjath-sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.   17
And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and he gave him Achsah his
daughter to wife.   18 And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to ask
of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wouldest
thou?   19 Who answered, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a south land; give me
also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.
The historian seems pleased with every occasion to make mention of Caleb and to do
him honour, because he had honoured God in following him fully. Observe,
I. The grant Joshua made him of the mountain of Hebron for his inheritance is here
repeated (v. 13), and it is said to be given him. 1. According to the commandment of the Lord
to Joshua. Though Caleb, in his petition, had made out a very good title to it by promise,
yet, because God had ordered Joshua to divide the land by lot, he would not in this one
single instance, no, not to gratify his old friend Caleb, do otherwise, without orders from
God, whose oracle, it is probable, he consulted upon this occasion. In every doubtful case
it is very desirable to know the mind of God, and to see the way of our duty plain. 2. It is
146
