Chapter X
if they would have followed it. Thus Satan and his instruments make war upon those that
make peace with God. Marvel not if the world hate you, and treat those as deserters who are
converts to Christ. 2. The Gibeonites send notice to Joshua of the distress and danger they
are in, v. 6. Now they expect benefit from the league they had made with Israel, because,
though it was obtained by deceit, it was afterwards confirmed when the truth came out.
They think Joshua obliged to help them, (1.) In conscience, because they were his servants;
not in compliment, as they had said in their first address (ch. ix. 8), We are thy servants, but
in reality made servants to the congregation; and it is the duty of masters to take care of the
poorest and meanest of their servants, and not to see them wronged when it is in the power
of their hand to right them. Those that pay allegiance may reasonably expect protection.
Thus David pleads with God (Ps. cxix. 94), I am thine, save me; and so may we, if indeed
we be his. (2.) In honour, because the ground of their enemies' quarrel with them was the
respect they had shown to Israel, and the confidence they had in a covenant with them.
Joshua cannot refuse to help them when it is for their affection to him, and to the name of
his God, that they are attacked. David thinks it a good plea with God (Ps. lxix. 7), For thy
sake I have borne reproach. When our spiritual enemies set themselves in array against us,
and threaten to swallow us up, let us, by faith and prayer, apply to Christ, our Joshua, for
strength and succour, as Paul did, and we shall receive the same answer of peace, My grace
is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. xii. 8, 9.
The Sun and Moon Stand Still. (b. c. 1450.)
7 So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him, and all the
mighty men of valour.   8 And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered
them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee.   9 Joshua therefore
came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all night.   10 And the Lord discomfited
them before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along
the way that goeth up to Beth-horon, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah.   11
And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were in the going down to Beth-
horon, that the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they
died: they were more which died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew
with the sword.   12 Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up
the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou
still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.   13 And the sun stood still, and
the moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this
written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not
to go down about a whole day.   14 And there was no day like that before it or after it, that
the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.
Here, I. Joshua resolves to assist the Gibeonites, and God encourages him in this resolve.
1. He ascended from Gilgal (v. 7), that is, he designed, determined, and prepared for, this
107
Chapter X
expedition to relieve Gibeon, for it is probable it was before he stirred a step that God spoke
to him to encourage him. It was generous and just in Joshua to help his new allies, though
perhaps the king of Jerusalem, when he attacked them, little thought that Joshua would be
so ready to help them, but expected he would abandon them as Canaanites, the rather because
they had obtained their league with him by fraud; therefore he speaks with assurance (v. 4)
of smiting Gibeon. But Joshua knew that his promise to let them live obliged him, not only
not to slay them himself, but not to stand by and see them slain when it was in the power
of his hand to prevent it, Prov. xxiv. 11, 12. He knew that when they embraced the faith and
worship of the God of Israel they came to trust under the shadow of his wings (Ruth ii. 12),
and therefore, as his servants, he was bound to protect them. 2. God animated him for his
undertaking, (v. 8): Fear not, that is, (1.) "Doubt not of the goodness of thy cause and the
clearness of thy call; though it be to assist Gibeonites, thou art in the way of duty, and God
is with thee of a truth." (2.) "Dread not the power of the enemy; though so many kings are
confederate against thee, and are resolved to make their utmost efforts for the reduction of
Gibeon, and it may be will fight desperately in a desperate cause, yet let not this discourage
thee, I have delivered them into thy hand;" and those can make neither resistance nor escape
whom God has marked for destruction.
II. Joshua applies himself to execute this resolve, and God assists him in the execution.
Here we have,
1. The great industry of Joshua, and the power of God working with it for the defeat of
the enemy. In this action, (1.) Joshua showed his good-will in the haste he made for the relief
of Gibeon (v. 9): He came unto them suddenly, for the extremity was such as would not admit
delay. If one of the tribes of Israel had been in danger, he could not have shown more care
or zeal for its relief than here for Gibeon, remembering in this, as in other cases, there must
be one law for the stranger that was proselyted and for him that was born in the land. Scarcely
had the confederate princes got their forces together, and sat down before Gibeon, when
Joshua was upon them, the surprise of which would put them into the greatest confusion.
Now that the enemy were actually drawn up into a body, which had all as it were but one
neck, despatch was as serviceable to his cause as before delay was, while he waited for this
general rendezvous; and now that things were ripe for execution no man more expeditious
than Joshua, who before had seemed slow. Now it shall never be said, He left that to be done
to-morrow which he could do to-day. When Joshua found he could not reach Gibeon in a
day, lest he should lose any real advantages against the enemy, or so much as seem to come
short or to neglect his new allies, he marched all night, resolving not to give sleep to his eyes,
nor slumber to his eye-lids, till he had accomplished this enterprise. It was well the forces
he took with him were mighty men of valour, not only able-bodied men, but men of spirit
and resolution, and hearty in the cause, else they neither could nor would have borne this
fatigue, but would have murmured at their leader and would have asked, "Is this the rest we
108
Chapter X
were promised in Canaan?" But they well considered that the present toil was in order to a
happy settlement, and therefore were reconciled to it. Let the good soldiers of Jesus Christ
learn hence to endure hardness, in following the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and not think
themselves undone if their religion lose them now and then a night's sleep; it will be enough
to rest when we come to heaven. But why needed Joshua to put himself and his men so
much to the stretch? Had not God promised him that without fail he would deliver the en-
emies into his hand? It is true he had; but God's promises are intended, not to slacken and
supersede, but to quicken and encourage our endeavours. He that believeth doth not make
haste to anticipate providence, but doth make haste to attend it, with a diligent, not a dis-
trustful, speed. (2.) God showed his great power in defeating the enemies whom Joshua so
vigorously attacked, v. 10, 11. Joshua had a very numerous and powerful army with him,
hands enough to despatch a dispirited enemy, so that the enemy might have been scattered
by the ordinary fate of war; but God himself would appear in this great and decisive battle,
and draw up the artillery of heaven against the Canaanites, to demonstrate to this people
that they got not this land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save
them, but God's right hand and his arm, Ps. xliv. 3. The Lord discomfited them before Israel.
Israel did what they could, and yet God did all. [1.] It must needs be a very great terror and
confusion to the enemy to perceive that heaven itself fought against them; for who can
contest with, flee from, or fence against, the powers of heaven? They had affronted the true
God and robbed him of his honour by worshipping the host of heaven, giving that worship
to the creature which is due to the Creator only; and now the host of heaven fights against
them, and even that part of the creation which they had idolized is at war with them, and
even triumphs in their ruin, Jer. viii. 2. There is no way of making any creature propitious
to us, no, not by sacrifice nor offering, but only by making our peace with God and keeping
ourselves in his love. This had been enough to make them an easy prey to the victorious Is-
raelites, yet this was not all. [2.] Besides the terror struck upon them, there was a great
slaughter made of them by hail-stones, which were so large, and came down with such a
force, that more were killed by the hail-stones than by the sword of the Israelites, though
no doubt they were busy. God himself speaks to Job of treasures, or magazines, of snow and
hail, which he has reserved for the day of battle and war (Job xxxviii. 22, 23), and here they
are made use of to destroy the Canaanites. Here was hail, shot from God's great ordnance,
that, against whomsoever it was directed, was sure to hit (and never glanced upon the Israel-
ites mixed with them), and wherever it hit was sure to kill. See here how miserable those
are that have God for their enemy, and how sure to perish; it is a fearful thing to fall into
his hands, for there is no fleeing out of them. Some observe that Beth-horon lay north of
Gibeon, Azekah and Makkedah lay south, so that they fled each way but, which way soever
they fled, the hail-stones pursued them, and met them at every turn.
109
Chapter X
2. The great faith of Joshua, and the power of God crowning it with the miraculous arrest
of the sun, that the day of Israel's victories might be prolonged, and so the enemy totally
defeated. The hail-stones had their rise no higher than the clouds, but, to show that Israel's
help came from above the clouds, the sun itself, who by his constant motion serves the whole
earth, by halting when there was occasion served the Israelites, and did them a kindness.
The sun and moon stood still in their habitation, at the light of thy arrows which gave the
signal, Hab. iii. 11.
(1.) Here is the prayer of Joshua that the sun might stand still. I call it his prayer, because
it is said (v. 12) he spoke to the Lord; as Elijah, though we read (1 Kings xvii. 1) only of his
prophesying of the drought, yet is said (James v. 17) to pray for it. Observe, [1.] An instance
of Joshua's unwearied activity in the service of God and Israel, that though he had marched
all night and fought all day, and, one might expect, would be inclined to repose himself and
get a little sleep, and give his army some time to rest—that, like the hireling, he would
earnestly desire the shadow, and bid the night welcome, when he had done such a good
day's work—yet, instead of this, he wishes for nothing so much as the prolonging of the day.
Note, Those that wait on the Lord and work for him shall renew their strength, shall run and
not be weary, shall walk and not faint, Isa. xl. 31. [2.] An instance of his great faith in the
almighty power of God, as above the power of nature, and able to control and alter the
usual course of it. No doubt Joshua had an extraordinary impulse or impression upon his
spirit, which he knew to be of divine origin, prompting him to desire that this miracle might
be wrought upon this occasion, else it would have been presumption in him to desire or
expect; the prayer would not have been granted by the divine power, if it had not been dic-
tated by the divine grace. God wrought this faith in him, and then said, "According to thy
faith, and thy prayer of faith, be it unto thee." It cannot be imagined, however, that such a
thing as this should have entered into his mind if God had not put it there; a man would
have had a thousand projects in his head for the completing of the victory before he would
have thought of desiring the sun to stand still; but even in the Old-Testament saints the
Spirit made intercession according to the will of God. What God will give he inclines the
hearts of his praying people to ask, and for what he will do he will be enquired of, Ezek.
xxxvi. 37. Now, First, It looked great for Joshua to say, Sun, stand thou still. His ancestor
Joseph had indeed dreamed that the sun and moon did homage to him; but who would have
thought that, after it had been fulfilled in the figure, it should be again fulfilled in the letter
to one of his posterity? The prayer is thus expressed with authority, because it was not an
ordinary prayer, such as is directed and supported only by God's common providence or
promise, but the prayer of a prophet at this time divinely inspired for this purpose; and yet
it intimates to us the prevalency of prayer in general, so far as it is regulated by the word of
God, and may remind us of that honour put upon prayer (Isa. xlv. 11), Concerning the work
of my hands command you me. He bids the sun stand still upon Gibeon, the place of action
110
Chapter X
and the seat of war, intimating that what he designed in this request was the advantage of
Israel against their enemies; it is probable that the sun was now declining, and that he did
not call for the lengthening out of the day until he observed it hastening towards it period.
He does likewise, in the name of the King of kings, arrest the moon, perhaps because it was
requisite for the preserving of the harmony and good order of the spheres that the course
of the rest of the heavenly bodies should be stayed likewise, otherwise, while the sun shone,
he needed not the moon; and here he mentions the valley of Ajalon, which was near to
Gibeon, because there he was at that time. Secondly, It was bold indeed to say so before Israel,
and argues a very strong assurance of faith. If the event had not answered the demand,
nothing could have been a greater slur upon him; the Israelites would have concluded he
was certainly going mad, or he would never have talked so extravagantly. But he knew very
well God would own and answer a petition which he himself directed to be drawn up and
presented, and therefore was not afraid to say before all Israel, calling them to observe this
work of wonder, Sun, stand thou still, for he was confident in him whom he had trusted.
He believed the almighty power of God, else he could not have expected that the sun, going
on in its strength, driving in a full career, and rejoicing as a strong man to run a race, should
be stopped in an instant. He believed the sovereignty of God in the kingdom of nature, else
he could not have expected that the established law and course of nature should be changed
and interrupted, the ordinances of heaven, and the constant usage according to these ordin-
ances, broken in upon. And he believed God's particular favour to Israel above all people
under the sun, else he could not have expected that, to favour them upon an emergency
with a double day, he should (which must follow of course) amaze and terrify so great a part
of the terrestrial globe with a double night at the same time. It is true, he causeth the sun to
shine upon the just and the unjust; but for this once the unjust shall wait for it beyond the
usual time, while, in favour to righteous Israel, it stands still.
(2.) The wonderful answer to this prayer. No sooner said than done (v. 13): The sun
stood still, and the moon staid. Notwithstanding the vast distance between the earth and the
sun, at the word of Joshua the sun stopped immediately; for the same God that rules in
heaven above rules at the same time on this earth, and, when he pleases, even the heavens
shall hear the earth, as here. Concerning this great miracle it is here said, [1.] That it continued
a whole day, that is, the sun continued as long again above the horizon as otherwise it would
have done. It is commonly supposed to have been about the middle of summer that this
happened, when, in that country, it was about fourteen hours between sun and sun, so that
this day was about twenty-eight hours long; yet, if we suppose it to have been at that time
of the year when the days are at the shortest, it will be the more probable that Joshua should
desire and pray for the prolonging of the day. [2.] That hereby the people had full time to
avenge themselves of their enemies, and to give them a total defeat. We often read in history
of battles which the night put an end to, the shadows of which favoured the retreat of the
111
Chapter X
conquered; to prevent this advantage to the enemy in their flight, the day was doubled, that
the hand of Israel might find out all their enemies; but the eye and hand of God can find
them out without the help of the sun's light, for to him the night shineth as the day, Ps.
cxxxix. 12. Note, Sometimes God completes a great salvation in a little time, and makes but
one day's work of it. Perhaps this miracle is alluded to Zech. xiv. 6, 7, where the day of God's
fighting against the nations is said to be one day, and that at evening time it shall be light, as
here. And, [3.] That there was never any day like it, before or since, in which God put such
an honour upon faith and prayer, and upon Israel's cause; never did he so wonderfully
comply with the request of a man, nor so wonderfully fight for his people. [4.] This is said
to be written in the book of Jasher, a collection of state-poems, in which the poem made
upon this occasion was preserved among the rest; probably the same with that book of the
wars of the Lord (Num. xxi. 14), which afterwards was continued and carried on by one
Jasher. Those words, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon,
sounding metrical, are supposed to be taken from the narrative of this event as it was found
in the book of Jasher. Not that the divine testimony of the book of Joshua needed confirm-
ation from the book of Jasher, a human composition; but to those who had that book in
their hands it would be of use to compare this history with it, which warrants the appeals
the learned make to profane history for corroborating the proofs of the truth of sacred history.
[5.] But surely this stupendous miracle of the standing still of the sun was intended for
something more than merely to give Israel so much the more time to find out and kill their
enemies, which, without this, might have been done the next day. First, God would hereby
magnify Joshua (ch. iii. 7), as a particular favourite, and one whom he did delight to honour,
being a type of him who has all power both in heaven and in earth and whom the winds
and the seas obey. Secondly, He would hereby notify to all the world what he was doing for
his people Israel here in Canaan; the sun, the eye of the world, must be fixed for some hours
upon Gibeon and the valley of Ajalon, as if to contemplate the great works of God there for
Israel, and so to engage the children of men to look that way, and to enquire of this wonder
done in the land, 2 Chron. xxxii. 31. Proclamation was hereby made to all the neighbouring
nations. Come, behold the works of the Lord (Ps. xlvi. 8), and say, What nation is there so
great as Israel is, who has God so nigh unto them? One would have supposed that this would
bring such real ambassadors as the Gibeonites pretended to be from a very far country, to
court the friendship of Israel because of the name of the Lord their God. Thirdly, He would
hereby convince and confound those idolaters that worshipped the sun and moon and gave
divine honours to them, by demonstrating that they were subject to the command of the
God of Israel, and that, as high as they were, he was above them; and thus he would fortify
his people against temptations to this idolatry, which he foresaw they would be addicted to
(Deut. iv. 19), and which, notwithstanding this, they afterwards corrupted themselves with.
Fourthly, This miracle signified (it is the learned bishop Pierson's notion) that in the latter
112
Chapter X
days, when the light of the world was tending towards a light of darkness, the Sun of right-
eousness, even our Joshua, should arise (Mal. iv. 2), give check to the approaching night,
and be the true light. To which let me add that when Christ conquered our spiritual enemies
upon the cross the miracle wrought on the sun was the reverse of this; it was then darkened
as if it had gone down at noon, for Christ needed not the light of the sun to carry on his
victories: he then made darkness his pavilion. And, Lastly, The arresting of the sun and
moon in this day of battle prefigured the turning of the sun into darkness, and the moon
into blood, in the last great and terrible day of the Lord.
The Five Kings Slain. (b. c. 1450.)
15 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.   16 But these
five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at Makkedah.   17 And it was told Joshua, saying,
The five kings are found hid in a cave at Makkedah.   18 And Joshua said, Roll great stones
upon the mouth of the cave, and set men by it for to keep them:   19 And stay ye not, but
pursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter into
their cities: for the Lord your God hath delivered them into your hand.   20 And it came to
pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very
great slaughter, till they were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into
fenced cities.   21 And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace:
none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.   22 Then said Joshua, Open
the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave.   23 And they
did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem,
the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.   24
And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called for
all the men of Israel, and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him,
Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their
feet upon the necks of them.   25 And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be
strong and of good courage: for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against whom ye
fight.   26 And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees:
and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.   27 And it came to pass at the time
of the going down of the sun, that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the
trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in the
cave's mouth, which remain until this very day.
It was a brave appearance, no doubt, which the five kings made when they took the field
for the reducing of Gibeon, and a brave army they had following them; but they were all
routed, put into disorder first, and then brought to destruction by the hail-stones. And now
Joshua thought, his work being done, he might go with his army into quarters of refreshment.
Accordingly it was resolved, perhaps in a council of war, that they should presently return
to the camp at Gilgal (v. 15), till they should receive orders from God to take possession of
113
