Chapter XIX
fell in the southern part of Canaan, between Judah on the east and the land of the Philistines
on the west, Ephraim on the north and Simeon on the south. Providence ordered this nu-
merous and powerful tribe into a post of danger, as best able to deal with those vexatious
neighbours the Philistines, and so it was found in Samson. Here is an account, 1. Of what
fell to this tribe by lot, Zorah, and Eshtaol, and the camp of Dan thereabouts, of which we
read in the story of Samson. And near there was the valley of Eshcol, whence the spies
brought the famous bunch of grapes. Japho, or Joppa was in this lot. 2. Of what they got by
their own industry and valour, which is mentioned here (v. 47), but related at large, Judg.
xviii. 7, &c.
The Inheritance of Joshua. (b. c. 1444.)
49 When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the
children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them:   50 According
to the word of the Lord they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath-serah in mount
Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.   51 These are the inheritances, which
Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of
the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the Lord, at the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end of dividing the country.
Before this account of the dividing of the land is solemnly closed up, in the last verse,
which intimates that the thing was done to the satisfaction of all, here is an account of the
particular inheritance assigned to Joshua. 1. He was last served, though the eldest and greatest
man of all Israel, and who, having commanded in the conquest of Canaan, might have de-
manded the first settlement in it for himself and his family. But he would make it to appear
that in all he did he sought the good of his country, and not any private interest of his own.
He was content to be unfixed till he saw them all settled; and herein is a great example to
all in public places to prefer the common welfare before their particular satisfaction. Let the
public be first served. 2. He had his lot according to the word of the Lord. It is probable that,
when God by Moses told Caleb what inheritance he should have (ch. xiv. 9), he gave the like
promise to Joshua, which he had an eye to in making his election: this made his portion
doubly pleasant, that he had it, not as the rest by common providence, but by special
promise. 3. He chose it in Mount Ephraim, which belonged to his own tribe, with which he
thereby put himself in common, when he might by prerogative have chosen his inheritance
in some other tribe, as suppose that of Judah, and thereby have distinguished himself from
them. Let no man's preferment or honour make him ashamed of his family or country, or
estrange him from it. The tabernacle was set up in the lot of Ephraim, and Joshua would
forecast not to be far from that. 4. The children of Israel are said to give it to him (v. 49),
which bespeaks his humility, that he would not take it to himself without the people's consent
and approbation, as if he would thereby own himself, though major singulis—greater than
any one, yet minor universis—less than the whole assemblage, and would hold even the estate
169
Chapter XIX
of his family, under God, by the grant of the people. 5. It was a city that must be built before
it was fit to be dwelt in. While others dwelt in houses which they built not, Joshua must
erect for himself (that he might be a pattern of industry and contentment with mean things)
such buildings as he could hastily run up, without curiosity or magnificence. Our Lord Jesus
thus came and dwelt among us, not in pomp but poverty, providing rest for us, yet himself
not having where to lay his head. Even Christ pleased not himself.
170
Chapter XX
Chapter XX
J O S H U A
CHAP. XX.
This short chapter is concerning the cities of refuge, which we often read of in the
writings of Moses, but this is the last time that we find mention of them, for now that matter
was thoroughly settled. Here is, I. The law God gave concerning them, ver. 1-6. II. The
people's designation of the particular cities for that use, ver. 7-9. And this remedial law was
a figure of good things to come.
The Cities of Refuge. (b. c. 1444.)
1 The Lord also spake unto Joshua, saying,   2 Speak to the children of Israel, saying,
Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses:   3
That the slayer that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and they
shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.   4 And when he that doth flee unto one of
those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause in
the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him
a place, that he may dwell among them.   5 And if the avenger of blood pursue after him,
then they shall not deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour un-
wittingly, and hated him not beforetime.   6 And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand
before the congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that shall be in
those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house,
unto the city from whence he fled.
Many things were by the law of Moses ordered to be done when they came to Canaan
and this among the rest, the appointing of sanctuaries for the protecting of those that were
guilty of casual murder, which was a privilege to all Israel, since no man could be sure but
some time or other it might be his own case; and it was for the interest of the land that the
blood of an innocent person, whose hand only was guilty but not his heart, should not be
shed, no, not by the avenger of blood: of this law, which was so much for their advantage,
God here reminds them, that they might remind themselves of the other laws he had given
them, which concerned his honour. 1. Orders are given for the appointing of these cities (v.
2), and very seasonably at this time when the land was newly surveyed, and so they were
the better able to divide the coasts of it into three parts, as God had directed them, in order
to the more convenient situation of these cities of refuge, Deut. xix. 3. Yet it is probable that
it was not done till after the Levites had their portion assigned them in the next chapter,
because the cities of refuge were all to be Levites' cities. As soon as ever God had given them
cities of rest, he bade them appoint cities of refuge, to which none of them knew but they
might be glad to escape. Thus God provided, not only for their ease at all times, but for their
safety in times of danger, and such times we must expect and prepare for in this world. And
it intimates what God's spiritual Israel have and shall have, in Christ and heaven, not only
171
Chapter XX
rest to repose themselves in, but refuge to secure themselves in. And we cannot think these
cities of refuge would have been so often and so much spoken of in the law of Moses, and
have had so much care taken about them (when the intention of them might have been ef-
fectually answered, as it is in our law, by authorizing the courts of judgment to protect and
acquit the manslayer in all those cases wherein he was to have privilege of sanctuary), if they
were not designed to typify the relief which the gospel provides for poor penitent sinners,
and their protection from the curse of the law and the wrath of God, in our Lord Jesus, to
whom believers flee for refuge (Heb. vi. 18), and in whom they are found (Phil. iii. 9) as in
a sanctuary, where they are privileged from arrests, and there is now no condemnation to
them, Rom. viii. 1. 2. Instructions are given for the using of these cities. The laws in this
matter we had before, Num. xxxv. 10, &c., where they were opened at large. (1.) It is supposed
that a man might possibly kill a person, it might be his own child or dearest friend, unawares
and unwittingly (v. 3), not only whom he hated not, but whom he truly loved beforetime
(v. 5); for the way of man is not in himself. What reason have we to thank God who has kept
us both from slaying and from being slain by accident! In this case, it is supposed that the
relations of the person slain would demand the life of the slayer, as a satisfaction to that
ancient law that whoso sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. (2.) It is provided
that if upon trial it appeared that the murder was done purely by accident, and not by design,
either upon an old grudge or a sudden passion, then the slayer should be sheltered from the
avenger of blood in any one of these cities, v. 4-6. By this law he was entitled to a dwelling
in that city, was taken into the care of the government of it, but was confined to it, as pris-
oner at large; only, if he survived the high priest, then, and not till then, he might return to
his own city. And the Jews say, "If he died before the high priest in the city of his refuge and
exile, and was buried there, yet, at the death of the high priest, his bones should be removed
with respect to the place of his fathers' sepulchres."
  7 And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount
Ephraim, and Kirjath-arba, which is Hebron, in the mountain of Judah.   8 And on the
other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain
out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in
Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.   9 These were the cities appointed for all the children
of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever killeth any person
at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he
stood before the congregation.
We have here the nomination of the cities of refuge in the land of Canaan, which was
made by the advice and authority of Joshua and the princes (v. 7); and upon occasion of the
mention of this is repeated the nomination of the other three in the lot of the other two
tribes and a half, which was made by Moses (Deut. iv. 43), but (as bishop Patrick thinks)
they had not the privilege till now. 1. They are said to sanctify these cities, that is the original
172
Chapter XX
word for appointed, v. 7. Not that any ceremony was used to signify the consecration of
them, only they did by a public act of court solemnly declare them cities of refuge, and as
such sacred to the honour of God, as the protector of exposed innocency. If they were
sanctuaries, it was proper to say they were sanctified. Christ, our refuge, was sanctified by
his Father; nay, for our sakes he sanctified himself, John xvii. 19. 2. These cities (as those
also on the other side Jordan) stood in the three several parts of the country, so conveniently
that a man might (they say) in half a day reach some one of them from any corner of the
country. Kedesh was in Naphtali, the most northern tribe, Hebron in Judah, the most
southern, and Shechem in Ephraim, which lay in the middle, about equally distant from the
other two. God is a refuge at hand. 3. They were all Levites' cities, which put an honour
upon God's tribe, making them judges in those cases wherein divine Providence was so
nearly concerned, and protectors to oppressed innocency. It was also a kindness to the poor
refugee, that when he might not go up to the house of the Lord, nor tread his courts, yet he
had the servants of God's house with him, to instruct him, and pray for him, and help to
make up the want of public ordinances. If he must be confined, it shall be to a Levite-city,
where he may, if he will, improve his time. 4. These cities were upon hills to be seen afar
off, for a city on a hill cannot be hid; and this would both direct and encourage the poor
distressed man that was making that way; and, though therefore his way at last was up-hill,
yet this would comfort him, that he would be in his place of safety quickly, and if he could
but get into the suburbs of the city he was well enough off. 5. Some observe a significancy
in the names of these cities with application to Christ our refuge. I delight not in quibbling
upon names, yet am willing to take notice of these. Kedesh signifies holy, and our refuge is
the holy Jesus. Shechem, a shoulder, and the government is upon his shoulder. Hebron, fel-
lowship, and believers are called into the fellowship of Christ Jesus our Lord. Bezer, a forti-
fication, for he is a strong-hold to all those that trust in him. Ramoth, high or exalted, for
him hath God exalted with his own right hand. Golan, joy or exultation, for in him all the
saints are justified, and shall glory. Lastly, Besides all these, the horns of the altar, wherever
it was, were a refuge to those who took hold of them, if the crime were such as that sanctuary
allowed. This is implied in that law (Exod. xxi. 14), that a wilful murderer shall be taken
from God's altar to be put to death. And we find the altar used for this purpose. 1 Kings i.
50; ii. 28. Christ is our altar, who not only sanctifies the gift, but protects the giver.
173
Chapter XXI
Chapter XXI
J O S H U A
CHAP. XXI.
It had been often said that the tribe of Levi should have "no inheritance with their
brethren," no particular part of the country assigned them, as the other tribes had, no, not
the country about Shiloh, which one might have expected to be appropriated to them as the
lands of the church; but, though they were not thus cast into a country by themselves, it
appears, by the provision made for them in this chapter, that they were no losers, but the
rest of the tribes were very much gainers, by their being dispersed. We have here, I. The
motion they made to have their cities assigned them, according to God's appointment, ver.
1, 2. II. The nomination of the cities accordingly out of the several tribes, and the distribution
of them to the respective families of this tribe, ver. 3-8. III. A catalogue of the cities, forty-
eight in all, ver. 9-42. IV. A receipt entered in full of all that God had promised to his people
Israel, ver. 43-45.
The Cities of the Levites. (b. c. 1444.)
1 Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and
unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children
of Israel;   2 And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The Lord
commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for
our cattle.   3 And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, at the
commandment of the Lord, these cities and their suburbs.   4 And the lot came out for the
families of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites,
had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of
Benjamin, thirteen cities.   5 And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the
families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of
Manasseh, ten cities.   6 And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of
the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.   7 The children of Merari by their
families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of
Zebulun, twelve cities.   8 And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities
with their suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.
Here is, I. The Levites' petition presented to this general convention of the states, now
sitting at Shiloh, v. 1, 2. Observe, 1. They had not their lot assigned them till they made their
claim. There is an inheritance provided for all the saints, that royal priesthood, but then
they must petition for it. Ask, and it shall be given you. Joshua had quickened the rest of the
tribes who were slack to put in their claims, but the Levites, it may be supposed, knew their
duty and interest better than the rest, and were therefore forward in this matter, when it
came to their turn, without being called upon. They build their claim upon a very good
174
Chapter XXI
foundation, not their own merits nor services, but the divine precept: "The Lord commanded
by the hand of Moses to give us cities, commanded you to grant them, which implied a
command to us to ask them." Note, The maintenance of ministers is not an arbitrary thing,
left purely to the good-will of the people, who may let them starve if they please; no, as the
God of Israel commanded that the Levites should be well provided for, so has the Lord Jesus,
the King of the Christian church, ordained, and a perpetual ordinance it is that those who
preach the gospel should live of the gospel (1 Cor. ix. 14), and should live comfortably. 2. They
did not make their claim till all the rest of the tribes were provided for, and then they did it
immediately. There was some reason for it; every tribe must first know their own, else they
would not know what they gave the Levites, and so it could not be such a reasonable service
as it ought to be. But it is also an instance of their humility, modesty, and patience (and
Levites should be examples of these and other virtues), that they were willing to be served
last, and they fared never the worse for it. Let not God's ministers complain if at any time
they find themselves postponed in men's thoughts and cares, but let them make sure of the
favour of God and the honour that comes from him, and then they may well enough afford
to bear the slights and neglects of men.
II. The Levites' petition granted immediately, without any dispute, the princes of Israel
being perhaps ashamed that they needed to be called upon in this matter, and that the motion
had not been made among themselves for the settling of the Levites. 1. The children of Israel
are said to give the cities for the Levites. God had appointed how many they should be in
all, forty-eight. It is probable that Joshua and the princes, upon consideration of the extent
and value of the lot of each tribe as it was laid before them, had appointed how many cities
should be taken out of each; and then the fathers of the several tribes themselves agreed
which they should be, and therefore are said to give them, as an offering, to the Lord; so
God had appointed. Num. xxxv. 8, Every one shall give of his cities to the Levites. Here God
tried their generosity, and it was found to praise and honour, for it appears by the following
catalogue that the cities they gave to the Levites were generally some of the best and most
considerable in each tribe. And it is probable that they had an eye to the situation of them,
taking care they should be so dispersed as that no part of the country should be too far distant
from a Levites' city. 2. They gave them at the commandment of the Lord, that is, with an eye
to the command and in obedience to it, which was it that sanctified the grant. They gave
the number that God commanded, and it was well this matter was settled that the Levites
might not ask more nor the Israelites offer less. They gave them also with their suburbs, or
glebe-lands, belonging to them, so many cubits by measure from the walls of the city, as
God had commanded (Num. xxxv. 4, 5), and did not go about to cut them short. 3. When
the forty-eight cities were pitched upon, they were divided into four lots, as they lay next
together, and then by lot were determined to the four several families of the tribe of Levi.
When the Israelites had surrendered the cities into the hand of God, he would himself have
175
Chapter XXI
the distributing of them among his servants. (1.) The family of Aaron, who were the only
priests, had for their share the thirteen cities that were given by the tribes of Judah, Simeon,
and Benjamin, v. 4. God in wisdom ordered it thus, that though Jerusalem itself was not
one of their cities, it being as yet in the possession of the Jebusites (and those generous tribes
would not mock the Levites, who had another warfare to mind, with a city that must be re-
covered by the sword before it could be enjoyed), yet the cities that fell to their lot were
those which lay next to Jerusalem, because that was to be, in process of time, the holy city,
where their business would chiefly lie. (2.) The Kohathite-Levites (among whom were the
posterity of Moses, though never distinguished from them) had the cities that lay in the lot
of Dan, which lay next to Judah, and in that of Ephraim, and the half-tribe of Manasseh,
which lay next to Benjamin. So those who descended from Aaron's father joined nearest to
Aaron's sons. (3.) Gershon was the eldest son of Levi, and therefore, though the younger
house of the Kohathites was preferred before his, yet his children had the precedency of the
other family of Merari, v. 6. (4.) The Merarites, the youngest house, had their lot last, and
it lay furthest off, v. 7. The rest of the sons of Jacob had a lot for every tribe only, but Levi,
God's tribe, had a lot for each of its families; for there is a particular providence directing
and attending the removals and settlements of ministers, and appointing where those shall
fix who are to be the lights of the world.
9 And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the
children of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name,   10 Which the children
of Aaron, being of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for
theirs was the first lot.   11 And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which
city is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it.   12 But
the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for
his possession.   13 Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs,   14 And Jattir
with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs,   15 And Holon with her suburbs, and
Debir with her suburbs,   16 And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and
Beth-shemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.   17 And out of the tribe
of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs,   18 Anathoth with her
suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.   19 All the cities of the children of Aaron,
the priests, were thirteen cities with their suburbs.   20 And the families of the children of
Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of
their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.   21 For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in
mount Ephraim, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs,   22 And
Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Beth-horon with her suburbs; four cities.   23 And out of
the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her suburbs,   24 Aijalon with
her suburbs, Gath-rimmon with her suburbs; four cities.   25 And out of the half tribe of
176
Chapter XXI
Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gath-rimmon with her suburbs; two cities.   26
All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that re-
mained.   27 And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the
other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of
refuge for the slayer; and Beesh-terah with her suburbs; two cities.   28 And out of the tribe
of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,   29 Jarmuth with her
suburbs, En-gannim with her suburbs; four cities.   30 And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal
with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,   31 Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with
her suburbs; four cities.   32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammoth-dor with her suburbs, and Kartan
with her suburbs; three cities.   33 All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families
were thirteen cities with their suburbs.   34 And unto the families of the children of Merari,
the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah
with her suburbs,   35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.   36
And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs,   37
Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.   38 And out of
the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and
Mahanaim with her suburbs,   39 Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four
cities in all.   40 So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families, which were re-
maining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot twelve cities.   41 All the cities of the
Levites within the possession of the children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their
suburbs.   42 These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them: thus were
all these cities.
We have here a particular account of the cities which were given to the children of Levi
out of the several tribes, not only to be occupied and inhabited by them, as tenants to the
several tribes in which they lay—no, their interest in them was not dependent and precarious,
but to be owned and possessed by them as lords and proprietors, and as having the same
title to them that the rest of the tribes had to their cities or lands, as appears by the law which
preserved the house in the Levites' cities from being alienated any longer than till the year
of jubilee, Lev. xxv. 32, 33. Yet it is probable that the Levites having only the cities and sub-
urbs, while the land about pertained to the tribes in which they lay, those of that tribe, for
the convenience of occupying that land, might commonly rent houses of the Levites, as they
could spare them in their cities, and so live among them as their tenants. Several things may
be observed in this account, besides what was observed in the law concerning it, Num. xxxv.
I. That the Levites were dispersed into all the tribes, and not suffered to live all together
in any one part of the country. This would find them all with work, and employ them all
for the good of others; for ministers, of all people, must neither be idle nor live to themselves
or to one another only. Christ left his twelve disciples together in a body, but left orders that
177
Chapter XXI
they should in due time disperse themselves, that they might preach the gospel to every
creature. The mixing of the Levites thus with the other tribes would be an obligation upon
them to walk circumspectly, and as became their sacred function, and to avoid every thing
that might disgrace it. Had they lived all together, they would have been tempted to wink
at one another's faults, and to excuse one another when they did amiss; but by this means
they were made to see the eyes of all Israel upon them, and therefore saw it their concern
to walk so as that their ministry might in nothing be blamed nor their high character suffer
by their ill carriage.
II. That every tribe of Israel was adorned and enriched with its share of Levites' cities
in proportion to its compass, even those that lay most remote. They were all God's people,
and therefore they all had Levites among them. 1. To show kindness to, as God appointed
them, Deut. xii. 19; xiv. 29. They were God's receivers, to whom the people might give their
grateful acknowledgments of God's goodness, as the occasion and disposition were. 2. To
receive advice and instruction from; when they could not go up to the tabernacle, to consult
those who attended there, they might go to a Levites' city, and be taught the good knowledge
of the Lord. Thus God set up a candle in every room of his house, to give light to all his
family; as those that attended the altar kept the charge of the Lord, to see that no divine ap-
pointment was neglected there, so those that were scattered in the country had their charge
too, which was to see that no idolatrous superstitious usages were introduced at a distance
and to watch for the souls of God's Israel. Thus did God graciously provide for the keeping
up of religion among them, and that they might have the word nigh them; yet, blessed be
God, we, under the gospel, have it yet nigher, not only Levites in every county, but Levites
in every parish, whose office it is still to teach the people knowledge, and to go before them
in the things of God.
III. That there were thirteen cities, and those some of the best, appointed for the priests,
the sons of Aaron, v. 19. Aaron left but two sons, Eleazar and Ithamar, yet his family was
now so much increased, and it was foreseen that it would in process of time grow so numer-
ous, as to replenish all these cities, though a considerable number must of necessity be res-
ident wherever the ark and the altar were. We read in both Testaments of such numbers of
priests that we may suppose none of all the families of Israel that came out of Egypt increased
afterwards so much as that of Aaron did; and the promise afterwards to the house of Aaron
is, God shall increase you more and more, you and your children, Ps. cxv. 12, 14. He will raise
up a seed to serve him.
IV. That some of the Levites' cities were afterwards famous upon other accounts. Hebron
was the city in which David began his reign, and in Manhanaim, another Levites' city (v.
38), he lay, and had his headquarters when he fled from Absalom. The first Israelite that
ever wore the title of king (namely, Abimelech, the son of Gideon) reigned in Shechem,
another Levites' city, v. 21.
178
Chapter XXI
V. That the number of them in all was more than of most of the tribes, except Judah,
though the tribe of Levi was one of the least of the tribes, to show how liberal God is, and
his people should be, to his ministers; yet the disproportion will not appear so great as at
first it seems, if we consider that the Levites had cities only with their suburbs to dwell in,
but the rest of the tribes, besides their cities (and those perhaps were many more than are
named in the account of their lot), had many unwalled towns and villages which they inhab-
ited, besides country houses.
Upon the whole, it appears that effectual care was taken that the Levites should live both
comfortably and usefully: and those, whether ministers or others, for whom Providence has
done well, must look upon themselves as obliged thereby to do good, and, according as their
capacity and opportunity are, to serve their generation.
43 And the Lord gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give unto their fathers;
and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.   44 And the Lord gave them rest round about, ac-
cording to all that he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their enemies
before them; the Lord delivered all their enemies into their hand.   45 There failed not ought
of any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.
We have here the conclusion of this whole matter, the foregoing history summed up,
and, to make it appear the more bright, compared with the promise of which it was the full
accomplishment. God's word and his works mutually illustrate each other. The performance
makes the promise appear very true and the promise makes the performance appear very
kind.
I. God had promised to give the seed of Abraham the land of Canaan for a possession,
and now at last he performed this promise (v. 43): They possessed it, and dwelt therein.
Though they had often forfeited the benefit of that promise, and God had long delayed the
performance of it, yet at last all difficulties were conquered, and Canaan was their own. And
the promise of the heavenly Canaan is as sure to all God's spiritual Israel, for it is the
promise of him that cannot lie.
II. God had promised to give them rest in that land, and now they had rest round about,
rest from the fatigues of their travel through the wilderness (which tedious march, perhaps,
was long in their bones), rest from their wars in Canaan, and the insults which their enemies
there had at first offered them. They now dwelt, not only in habitations of their own, but
those quiet and peaceable ones; though there were Canaanites that remained, yet none that
had either strength or spirit to attack them, nor so much as give them an alarm. This rest
continued till they by their own sin and folly put thorns into their own beds and their own
eyes.
III. God had promised to give them victory and success in their wars, and this promise
likewise was fulfilled: There stood not a man before them, v. 44. They had the better in every
battle, and which way soever they turned their forces they prospered. It is true there were
179
Chapter XXI
Canaanites now remaining in many parts of the land, and such as afterwards made head
against them, and became very formidable. But, 1. As to the present remains of the
Canaanites, they were no contradiction to the promise, for God had said he would not drive
them out all at once, but by little and little, Exod. xxiii. 30. They had now as much in their
full possession as they had occasion for and as they had hands to manage, so that the
Canaanites only kept possession of some of the less cultivated parts of the country against
the beasts of the field, till Israel, in process of time, should become numerous enough to
replenish them. 2. As to the after prevalency of the Canaanites, that was purely the effect of
Israel's cowardice and slothfulness, and the punishment of their sinful inclination to the
idolatries and other abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord would have cast out before
them but that they harboured and indulged them. So that the foundation of God stands
sure. Israel's experience of God's fidelity is here upon record, and is an acquittance under
their hands to the honour of God, the vindication of his promise which had been so often
distrusted, and the encouragement of all believers to the end of the world: There failed not
any good thing, no, nor aught of any good thing (so full is it expressed), which the Lord had
spoken unto the house of Israel, but in due time all came to pass, v. 45. Such an acknowledg-
ment as this, here subscribed by Joshua in the name of all Israel, we afterwards find made
by Solomon, and all Israel did in effect say Amen to it, 1 Kings viii. 56. The inviolable truth
of God's promise, and the performance of it to the utmost, are what all the saints have been
ready to bear their testimony to; and, if in any thing the performance has seemed to come
short, they have been as ready to own that they themselves must bear all the blame.
180
Chapter XXII
Chapter XXII
J O S H U A
CHAP. XXII.
Many particular things we have read concerning the two tribes and a half, though
nothing separated them from the rest of the tribes except the river Jordan, and this chapter
is wholly concerning them. I. Joshua's dismission of the militia of those tribes from the camp
of Israel, in which the had served as auxiliaries, during all the wars of Canaan, and their return
thereupon to their own country, ver. 1-9. II. The altar they built on the borders of Jordan,
in token of their communion with the land of Israel, ver. 10. III. The offence which the rest
of the tribes took at this altar, and the message they sent thereupon, ver. 11-20. IV. The
apology which the two tribes and a half made for what they had done, ver. 21-29. V. The
satisfaction which their apology gave to the rest of the tribes, ver. 30-34. And (which is
strange), whereas in most differences that happen there is a fault on both sides, on this there
was fault on no side; none (for aught that appears) were to be blamed, but all to be praised.
The Reubenites, Gadites, and Half Tribe of Manasseh Dismissed. (b. c. 1444.)
1 Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh,  
2 And said unto them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you,
and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you:   3 Ye have not left your brethren
these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment of the Lord
your God.   4 And now the Lord your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as he promised
them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your tents, and unto the land of your pos-
session, which Moses the servant of the Lord gave you on the other side Jordan.   5 But take
diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of the Lord
charged you, to love the Lord your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his com-
mandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your
soul.   6 So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto their tents.   7
Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given possession in Bashan: but
unto the other half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan westward.
And when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them,   8 And he
spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents, and with very much
cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment:
divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.   9 And the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children
of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country of Gilead, to
the land of their possession, whereof they were possessed, according to the word of the Lord
by the hand of Moses.
The war being ended, and ended gloriously, Joshua, as a prudent general, disbands his
army, who never designed to make war their trade, and sends them home, to enjoy what
181
Chapter XXII
they had conquered, and to beat their swords into plough-shares and their spears into
pruning-hooks; and particularly the forces of these separate tribes, who had received their
inheritance on the other side Jordan from Moses upon this condition, that their men of war
should assist the other tribes in the conquest of Canaan, which they promised to do (Num.
xxxii. 32), and renewed the promise to Joshua at the opening of the campaign, Josh. i. 16.
And, now that they had performed their bargain, Joshua publicly and solemnly in Shiloh
gives them their discharge. Whether this was done, as it was placed, not till after the land
was divided, as some think, or whether after the war was ended, and before the division was
made, as others think (because there was no need of their assistance in dividing the land,
but only in conquering it, nor were there any of their tribes employed as commissioners in
that affair, but only of the other ten, Num. xxxiv. 18, &c.), this is certain, it was not done till
after Shiloh was made the head-quarters (v. 2), and the land was begun to be divided before
they removed from Gilgal, ch. xiv. 6.
It is probable that this army of Reubenites and Gadites, which had led the van in all the
wars of Canaan, had sometimes, in the intervals of action, and when the rest of the army
retired into winter-quarters, some of them at least, made a step over Jordan, for it was not
far, to visit their families, and to look after their private affairs, and perhaps tarried at home,
and sent others in their room more serviceable; but still these two tribes and a half had their
quota of troops ready, 40,000 in all, which, whenever there was occasion, presented them-
selves at their respective posts, and now attended in a body to receive their discharge. Though
their affection to their families, and concern for their affairs, could not but make them, after
so long an absence, very desirous to return, yet, like good soldiers, they would not move till
they had orders from their general. So, though our heavenly Father's house above be ever
so desirable (it is bishop Hall's allusion), yet must we stay on earth till our warfare be accom-
plished, wait for a due discharge, and not anticipate the time of our removal.
I. Joshua dismisses them to the land of their possession, v. 4. Those that were first in the
assignment of their lot were last in the enjoyment of it; they got the start of their brethren
in title, but their brethren were before them in full possession; so the last shall be first, and
the first last, that there may be something of equality.
II. He dismisses them with their pay; for who goes a warfare at his own charge? Return
with much riches unto your tents, v. 8. Though all the land they had helped to conquer was
to go to the other tribes, yet they should have their share of the plunder, and had so, and
this was all the pay that any of the soldiers expected; for the wars of Canaan bore their own
charges. "Go," says Joshua, "go home to your tents," that is, "your houses," which he calls
tents, because they had been so much used to tents in the wilderness; and indeed the strongest
and stateliest houses in this world are to be looked upon but as tents, mean and movable in
comparison with our house above. "Go home with much riches, not only cattle, the spoil of
the country, but silver and gold, the plunder of the cities, and," 1. "Let your brethren whom
182
