Introduction
of Judah (which style began after Solomon and ended in the captivity) unto this day. And
it is still more probable that those which follow were put together by Ezra the scribe, some
time after the captivity. However, though we are in the dark concerning their authors, we
are in no doubt concerning their authority; they were a part of the oracles of God, which
were committed to the Jews, and were so received and referred to by our Saviour and the
apostles.
In the five books of Moses we had a very full account of the rise, advance, and constitu-
tion, of the Old-Testament church, the family out of which it was raised, the promise, that
great charter by which it was incorporated, the miracles by which it was built up, and the
laws and ordinances by which it was to be governed, from which one would conceive and
expectation of its character and state very different from what we find in this history. A nation
that had statutes and judgments so righteous, one would think, should have been very holy;
and a nation what had promises so rich should have been very happy. But, alas! a great part
of the history is a melancholy representation of their sins and miseries; for the law made
nothing perfect, but this was to be done by the bringing in of the better hope. And yet, if we
compare the history of the Christian church with its constitution, we shall find the same
cause for wonder, so many have been its errors and corruptions; for neither does the gospel
make any thing perfect in this world, but leaves us still in expectation of a better hope in the
future state.
II. We have next before us the book of Joshua, so called, perhaps, not because it was
written by him, for that is uncertain. Dr. Lightfoot thinks that Phinehas wrote it. Bishop
Patrick is clear that Joshua wrote it himself. However that be, it is written concerning him,
and, if any other wrote it, it was collected out of his journals or memoirs. It contains the
history of Israel under the command and government of Joshua, how he presided as general
of their armies, 1. In their entrance into Canaan, ch. i.-v. 2. In their conquest of Canaan, ch.
vi.-xii. 3. In the distribution of the land of Canaan among the tribes of Israel, ch. xiii.-xxi.
4. In the settlement and establishment of religion among them, ch. xxii.-xxiv. In all which
he was a great example of wisdom, courage, fidelity, and piety, to all that are in places of
public trust. But this is not all the use that is to be made of this history. We may see in it, 1.
Much of God and his providence—his power in the kingdom of nature, his justice in punishing
the Canaanites when the measure of their iniquity was full, his faithfulness to his covenant
with the patriarchs, and his kindness to his people Israel, notwithstanding their provocations.
We may see him as the Lord of Hosts determining the issues of war, and as the director of
the lot, determining the bounds of men's habitations. 2. Much of Christ and his grace. Though
Joshua is not expressly mentioned in the New Testament as a type of Christ, yet all agree
that he was a very eminent one. He bore our Saviour's name, as did also another type of
him, Joshua the high priest, Zech. vi. 11, 12. The LXX., giving the name of Joshua a Greek
termination, call him all along Iesous, Jesus, and so he is called Acts vii. 45, and Heb. iv. 8.
9
Introduction
Justin Martyr, one of the first writers of the Christian church (Dialog. cum Tryph. p. mihi
300), makes that promise in Exod. xxiii. 20, My angel shall bring thee into the place I have
prepared, to point at Joshua; and these words, My name is in him, to refer to this, that his
names should be the same with that of the Messiah. It signifies, He shall save. Joshua saves
God's people from the Canaanites; our Lord Jesus saves them from their sins. Christ, as
Joshua, is the captain of our salvation, a leader and commander of the people, to tread Satan
under their feet, to put them in possession of the heavenly Canaan, and to give them rest,
which (it is said, Heb. iv. 8) Joshua did not.
10
Chapter I
Chapter I
J O S H U A
CHAP. I.
The book begins with the history, not of Joshua's life (many remarkable passages of that
we had before in the books of Moses) but of his reign and government. In this chapter, I.
God appoints him to the government in the stead of Moses, gives him an ample commission,
full instructions, and great encouragements, ver. 1-9. II. He accepts the government, and
addresses himself immediately to the business of it, giving orders to the officers of the people
in general, ver. 10, 11, and particularly to the two tribes and a half, ver. 12-15. III. The people
agree to it, and take an oath of fealty to him, ver. 16-18. A reign which thus began with God
could not but be honourable to the prince and comfortable to the subject. The last words
of Moses are still verified, "Happy art thou, O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people?" Deut.
xxxiii. 29.
Joshua Directed and Encouraged. (b. c. 1451.)
1 Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord it came to pass, that the Lord
spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying,   2 Moses my servant is dead;
now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do
give to them, even to the children of Israel.   3 Every place that the sole of your foot shall
tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses.   4 From the wilderness and
this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and
unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.   5 There shall not
any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be
with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.   6 Be strong and of a good courage: for unto
this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers
to give them.   7 Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the
right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest.   8 This book
of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night,
that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt
make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.   9 Have not I commanded
thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord
thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.
Honour is here put upon Joshua, and great power lodged in his hand, by him that is the
fountain of honour and power, and by whom kings reign. Instructions are given him by
Infinite Wisdom, and encouragements by the God of all consolation. God had before spoken
to Moses concerning him (Num. xxvii. 18), but now he speaks to him (v. 1), probably as he
spoke to Moses (Lev. i. 1) out of the tabernacle of the congregation, where Joshua had with
Moses presented himself (Deut. xxxi. 14), to learn the way of attending there. Though
11
Chapter I
Eleazar had the breast-plate of judgment, which Joshua was directed to consult as there was
occasion (Num. xxvii. 21), yet, for his greater encouragement, God here speaks to him im-
mediately, some think in a dream or vision (as Job xxxiii. 15); for though God has tied us
to instituted ordinances, in them to attend him, yet he has not tied himself to them, but that
he may without them make himself known to his people, and speak to their hearts otherwise
than by their ears. Concerning Joshua's call to the government observe here,
I. The time when it was given him: After the death of Moses. As soon as ever Moses was
dead, Joshua took upon him the administration, by virtue of his solemn ordination in Moses's
life-time. An interregnum, though but for a few days, might have been of bad consequence;
but it is probable that God did not speak to him to go forward towards Canaan till after the
thirty days of mourning for Moses were ended; not, as the Jews say, because the sadness of
his spirit during those days unfitted him for communion with God (he sorrowed not as one
that had no hope), but by this solemn pause, and a month's adjournment of the public
councils, even now when time was so very precious to them, God would put an honour
upon the memory of Moses, and give time to the people not only to lament their loss of
him, but to repent of their miscarriages towards him during the forty years of his government.
II. The place Joshua had been in before he was thus preferred. He was Moses's minister,
that is, an immediate attendant upon his person and assistant in business. The LXX. translates
it hypourgos, a workman under Moses, under his direction and command. Observe, 1. He
that was here called to honour had been long bred to business. Our Lord Jesus himself took
upon him the form of a servant, and then God highly exalted him. 2. He was trained up in
subjection and under command. Those are fittest to rule that have learnt to obey. 3. He that
was to succeed Moses was intimately acquainted with him, that he might fully know his
doctrine and manner of life, his purpose and long-suffering (2 Tim. iii. 10), might take the
same measures, walk in the same spirit, in the same steps, having to carry on the same work.
4. He was herein a type of Christ, who might therefore be called Moses's minister, because
he was made under the law and fulfilled all the righteousness of it.
III. The call itself that God gave him, which is very full.
1. The consideration upon which he was called to the government: Moses my servant is
dead, v. 2. All good men are God's servants; and it is no disparagement, but an honour, to
the greatest of men to be so: angels themselves are his ministers. Moses was called to ex-
traordinary work, was a steward in God's house, and in the discharge of the trusts reposed
in him he served not himself but God who employed him; he was faithful as a servant, and
with an eye to the Son, as is intimated, Heb. iii. 5, where what he did is said to be for a
testimony of the things that should be spoken after. God will own his servants, will confess
them in the great day. But Moses, though God's servant, and one that could ill be spared, is
dead; for God will change hands, to show that whatever instruments he uses he is not tied
to any. Moses, when he has done his work as a servant, dies and goes to rest from his labours,
12
Chapter I
and enters into the joy of his Lord. Observe, God takes notice of the death of his servants. It
is precious in his sight, Ps. cxvi. 15.
2. The call itself. Now therefore arise. (1.) "Though Moses is dead, the work must go on;
therefore arise, and go about it." Let not weeping hinder sowing, nor the withering of the
most useful hands be the weakening of ours; for, when God has work to do, he will either
find or make instruments fit to carry it on. Moses the servant is dead, but God the Master
is not: he lives for ever. (2.) "Because Moses is dead, therefore the work devolves upon thee
as his successor, for hereunto thou wast appointed. Therefore there is need of thee to fill up
his place; up, and be doing." Note, [1.] The removal of useful men should quicken survivors
to be so much the more diligent in doing good. Such and such are dead, and we must die
shortly, therefore let us work while it is day. [2.] It is a great mercy to a people, if, when
useful men are taken away in the midst of their usefulness, others are raised up in their stead
to go on where they broke off. Joshua must arise to finish what Moses began. Thus the latter
generations enter into the labours of the former. And thus Christ, our Joshua, does that for
us which could never be done by the law of Moses,—justifies (Acts xiii. 39), and sanctifies,
Romans viii. 3. The life of Moses made way for Joshua, and prepared the people for what
was to be done by him. Thus the law is a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ: and then the
death of Moses made room for Joshua; thus we are dead to the law, our first husband, that
we may be married to Christ, Rom. vii. 4.
3. The particular service he was now called out to: "Arise, go over this Jordan, this river
which you have in view, and on the banks of which you lie encamped." This was a trial to
the faith of Joshua, whether he would give orders to make preparation for passing the river
when there was no visible way of getting over it, at least not at this place and at this time,
when all the banks were overflown, ch. iii. 15. He had no pontoons or bridge of boats by
which to convey them over, and yet he must believe that God, who had ordered them over,
would open a way for them. Going over Jordan was going into Canaan; thither Moses might
not, could not, bring them, Deut. xxxi. 2. Thus the honour of bringing the many sons to
glory is reserved for Christ the captain of our salvation, Heb. ii. 10.
4. The grant of the land of Canaan to the children of Israel is here repeated (v. 2-4): I
do give it them. To the patriarchs it was promised, I will give it; but, now that the fourth
generation had expired, the iniquity of the Amorites was full, and the time had come for
the performance of the promise, it is actually conveyed, and they are put in possession of
that which they had long been in expectation of: "I do give it, enter upon it, it is all your
own; nay (v. 3), I have given it; though it be yet unconquered, it is as sure to you as if it were
in your hands." Observe, (1.) The persons to whom the conveyance is made: To them, even
to the children of Israel (v. 2), because they are the seed of Jacob, who was called Israel at the
time when this promise was made to him, Gen. xxxv. 10, 12. The children of Israel, though
they had been very provoking in the wilderness, yet, for their fathers' sakes, should have the
13
Chapter I
entail preserved. And it was the children of the murmurers that God said should enter
Canaan, Num. xiv. 31. (2.) The land itself that is conveyed: From the river Euphrates eastward,
to the Mediterranean Sea westward, v. 4. Though their sin cut them short of this large pos-
session, and they never replenished all the country within the bounds here mentioned, yet,
had they been obedient, God would have given them this and much more. Out of all these
countries, and many others, there were in process of time proselytes to the Jewish religion,
as appears, Acts ii. 5, &c. If their church was enlarged, though their nation was not multiplied,
it cannot be said that the promise was of no effect. And, if this promise had not its full ac-
complishment in the letter, believers might thence infer that it had a further meaning, and
was to be fulfilled in the kingdom of the Messiah, both that of grace and that of glory. (3.)
The condition is here implied upon which this grant is made, in those words, as I said unto
Moses, that is, "upon the terms that Moses told you of many a time, if you will keep my
statutes, you shall go in and possess that good land. Take it under those provisos and limit-
ations, and not otherwise." The precept and promise must not be separated. (4.) It is intimated
with what ease they should gain the possession of this land, if it were not their own fault, in
these words, "Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon (within the following
bounds) shall be your own. Do but set your foot upon it and you have it."
5. The promises God here makes to Joshua for his encouragement. (1.) That he should
be sure of the presence of God with him in this great work to which he was called (v. 5): "As
I was with Moses, to direct and strengthen him, to own and prosper him, and give him success
in bringing Israel out of Egypt and leading them through the wilderness, so I will be with
thee to enable thee to settle them in Canaan." Joshua was sensible how far he came short of
Moses in wisdom and grace; But what Moses did was done by virtue of the presence of God
with him, and, though Joshua had not always the same presence of mind that Moses had,
yet, if he had always the same presence of God, he would do well enough. Note, it is a great
comfort to the rising generation of ministers and Christians that the same grace which was
sufficient for those that went before them shall not be wanting to them if they be not wanting
to themselves in the improvement of it. It is repeated here again (v. 9). "The Lord thy God
is with thee as a God of power, and that power engaged for thee whithersoever thou goest."
Note, Those that go where God sends them shall have him with them wherever they go and
they need desire no more to make them easy and prosperous. (2.) That the presence of God
should never be withdrawn from him: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, v. 5. Moses had
assured him of this (Deut. xxxi. 8), that, though he must now leave him, God never would:
and here God himself confirms that word of his servant Moses (Isa. xliv. 26), and engages
never to leave Joshua. We need the presence of God, not only when we are beginning our
work to set us in, but in the progress of it to further us with a continual help. If that at any
time fail us, we are gone; this we may be sure, that the Lord is with us while we are with him.
This promise here made to Joshua is applied to all believers, and improved as an argument
14
Chapter I
against covetousness, Heb. xiii. 5, Be content with such things as you have, for he hath said,
I will never leave thee. (3.) That he should have victory over all the enemies of Israel (v. 5):
There shall not any man that comes against thee be able to stand before thee. Note, There is
no standing before those that have God on their side. If he be for us, who can be against us?
God promises him clear success—the enemy should not make any head against him; and
constant success—all the days of his life. However it might be with Israel when he was gone,
all his reign should be graced with triumphs. What Joshua had himself encouraged the
people with long ago (Num. xiv. 9) God here encourages him with. (4.) That he should
himself have the dividing of this land among the people of Israel, v. 6. It was a great encour-
agement to him in beginning this work that he was sure to see it finished and his labour
should not be in vain. Some make it a reason why he should arm himself with resolution,
and be of good courage, because of the bad character of the people whom he must cause to
inherit that land. He knew well what a froward discontented people they were, and how
unmanageable they had been in his predecessor's time; let him therefore expect vexation
from them and be of good courage.
6. The charge or command he gives to Joshua, which is,
(1.) That he conform himself in every thing to the law of God, and make this his rule v.
7, 8. God does, as it were, put the book of the law into Joshua's hand; as, when Joash was
crowned, they gave him the testimony, 2 Kings xi. 12. And concerning this book he is charged,
[1.] To meditate therein day and night, that he might understand it and have it ready in him
upon all occasions. If ever any man's business might have excused him from meditation,
and other acts of devotion, one would think Joshua's might at this time. It was a great trust
that was lodged in his hands; the care of it was enough to fill him, if he had had ten souls,
and yet he must find time and thoughts for meditation. Whatever affairs of this world we
have to mind, we must not neglect the one thing needful. [2.] Not to let it depart out of his
mouth; that is, all his orders to the people, and his judgments upon appeals made to him,
must be consonant to the law of God; upon all occasions he must speak according to this
rule, Isa. viii. 20. Joshua was to maintain and carry on the work that Moses had begun, and
therefore he must not only complete the salvation Moses had wrought for them, but must
uphold the holy religion he had established among them. There was no occasion to make
new laws; but that good thing which was committed to him he must carefully and faithfully
keep, 2 Tim. i. 14. [3.] He must observe to do according to all this law. To this end he must
meditate therein, not for contemplation sake only, or to fill his head with notions, or that
he might find something to puzzle the priests with, but that he might, both as a man and as
a magistrate, observe to do according to what was written therein; and several things were
written there which had particular reference to the business he had now before him, as the
laws concerning their wars, the destroying of the Canaanites and the dividing of Canaan;
&c.; these he must religiously observe. Joshua was a man of great power and authority, yet
15
Chapter I
he must himself be under command and do as he is bidden. No man's dignity or dominion,
how great soever, sets him above the law of God. Joshua must not only govern by law, and
take care that the people observed the law, but he must observe it himself, and so by his own
example maintain the honour and power of it. First, He must do what was written. It is not
enough to hear and read the word, to commend and admire it, to know and remember it,
to talk and discourse of it, but we must do it. Secondly, He must do according to what was
written, exactly observing the law as his copy, and doing, not only that which was there re-
quired, but in all circumstances according to the appointment. Thirdly, He must do according
to all that was written, without exception or reserve, having a respect to all God's command-
ments, even those which are most displeasing to flesh and blood. Fourthly, He must observe
to do so, observe the checks of conscience, the hints of providence; and all the advantages
of opportunity. Careful observance is necessary to universal obedience. Fifthly, He must not
turn from it, either in his own practice or in any act of government, to the right hand or to
the left, for there are errors on both hands, and virtue is in the mean. Sixthly, He must be
strong and courageous, that he might do according to the law. So many discouragements
there are in the way of duty that those who will proceed and persevere in it must put on
resolution. And, lastly, to encourage him in his obedience, he assures him that then he shall
do wisely (as it is in the margin) and make his way prosperous, v. 7, 8. Those that make the
word of God their rule, and conscientiously walk by that rule, shall both do well and speed
well; it will furnish them with the best maxims by which to order their conversation (Ps.
cxi. 10); and it will entitle them to the best blessings: God shall give them the desire of their
heart.
(2.) That he encourage himself herein with the promise and presence of God, and make
these his stay (v. 6): Be strong and of a good courage. And again (v. 7), as if this was the one
thing needful: Only be strong and very courageous. And he concludes with this (v. 9): Be
strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed. Joshua had long since
signalized his valour, in the war with Amalek, and in his dissent from the report of the evil
spies; and yet God sees fit thus to inculcate this precept upon him. Those that have grace
have need to be called upon again and again to exercise grace and to improve in it. Joshua
was humble and low in his own eyes, not distrustful of God, and his power, and promise,
but diffident of himself, and of his own wisdom, and strength, and sufficiency for the work,
especially coming after so great a man as Moses; and therefore God repeats this so often,
"Be strong and of a good courage; let not the sense of thy own infirmities dishearten thee;
God is all-sufficient. Have not I commanded thee?" [1.] "I have commanded the work to be
done, and therefore it shall be done, how invincible soever the difficulties may seem that lie
in the way." Nay, [2.] "I have commanded, called, and commissioned, thee to do it, and
therefore will be sure to own thee, and strengthen thee, and bear thee out in it." Note, When
we are in the way of our duty we have reason to be strong and very courageous; and it will
16
Chapter I
help very much to animate and embolden us if we keep our eye upon the divine warrant,
hear God saying, "Have not I commanded thee? I will therefore help thee, succeed thee, accept
thee, reward thee." Our Lord Jesus, as Joshua here, was borne up under his sufferings by a
regard to the will of God and the commandment he had received from his Father, John x. 18.
Joshua's Address to the Reubenites. (b. c. 1451.)
10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,   11 Pass through the
host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you victuals; for within three days ye shall
pass over this Jordan, to go in to possess the land, which the Lord your God giveth you to
possess it.   12 And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh,
spake Joshua, saying,   13 Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord com-
manded you, saying, The Lord your God hath given you rest, and hath given you this land.
  14 Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in the land which Moses gave
you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass before your brethren armed, all the mighty men
of valour, and help them;   15 Until the Lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath given
you, and they also have possessed the land which the Lord your God giveth them: then ye
shall return unto the land of your possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the Lord's servant
gave you on this side Jordan toward the sunrising.
Joshua, being settled in the government, immediately applies himself to business; not
to take state or to take his pleasure, but to further the work of God among, the people over
whom God had set him. As he that desires the office of a minister (1 Tim. iii. 1), so he that
desires the office of a magistrate, desires a work, a good work; neither is preferred to be idle.
I. He issues out orders to the people to provide for a march; and they had been so long
encamped in their present post that it would be a work of some difficulty to decamp. The
officers of the people that commanded under Joshua in their respective tribes and families
attended him for orders, which they were to transmit to the people. Inferior magistrates are
as necessary and as serviceable to the public good in their places as the supreme magistrate
in his. What could Joshua have done without officers? We are therefore required to be
subject, not only to the king as supreme, but to governors as to those that are sent by him, 1
Pet. ii. 13, 14. By these officers, 1. Joshua gives public notice that they were to pass over
Jordan within three days. These orders, I suppose, were not given till after the return of the
spies that were sent to bring an account of Jericho, though the story of that affair follows,
ch. ii. And perhaps that was such an instance of his jealousy, and excessive caution, as made
it necessary that he should be so often bidden as he was to be strong and of a good courage.
Observe with what assurance Joshua says to the people, because God had said it to him, You
shall pass over Jordan, and shall possess the land. We greatly honour the truth of God. 2. He
gives them directions to prepare victuals, not to prepare transport vessels. He that bore
Egypt upon eagle's wings would in like manner bear them into Canaan, to bring them to
himself, Exod. xix. 4. But those that were desirous to have other victuals besides the manna,
17
