Chapter XIV
2. In his petition he sets forth,
(1.) The testimony of his conscience concerning his integrity in the management of that
great affair on which it proved the fare of Israel turned, the spying out of the land. Caleb
was one of the twelve that were sent out on that errand (v. 7), and he now reflected upon it
with comfort, and mentioned it, not in pride, but as that which, being the consideration of
the grant, was necessary to be inserted in the plea, [1.] That he made his report as it was in
his heart, that is, he spoke as he thought when he spoke so honourably of the land of Canaan,
so confidently of the power of God to put them in possession of it, and so contemptibly of
the opposition that the Canaanites, even the Anakim themselves, could make against them,
as we find he did, Num. xiii. 30; xiv. 7-9. He did not do it merely to please Moses, or to keep
the people quiet, much less from a spirit of contradiction to his fellows, but from a full
conviction of the truth of what he said and a firm belief of the divine promise. [2.] That
herein he wholly followed the Lord his God, that is, he kept close to his duty, and sincerely
aimed at the glory of God in it. He conformed himself to the divine will with an eye to the
divine favour. He had obtained this testimony from God himself (Num. xiv. 24), and
therefore it was not vain-glory in him to speak of it, any more than it is for those who have
God's Spirit witnessing with their spirits that they are the children of God humbly and
thankfully to tell others for their encouragement what God has done for their souls. Note,
Those that follow God fully when they are young shall have both the credit and comfort of
it when they are old, and the reward of it for ever in the heavenly Canaan. [3.] That he did
this when all his brethren and companions in that service, except Joshua, did otherwise.
They made the heart of the people melt (v. 8), and how pernicious the consequences of it
were was very well known. It adds much to the praise of following God if we adhere to him
when others desert and decline from him. Caleb needed not to mention particularly Joshua's
conduct in this matter; it was sufficiently known, and he would not seem to flatter him; it
was enough to say (v. 6), Thou knowest what the Lord spoke concerning me and thee.
(2.) The experience he had had of God's goodness to him ever since to this day. Though
he had wandered with the rest in the wilderness, and had been kept thirty-eight years out
of Canaan as they were, for that sin which he was so far from having a hand in that he had
done his utmost to prevent it, yet, instead of complaining of this, he mentioned, to the glory
of God, his mercy to him in two things:—[1.] That he was kept alive in the wilderness, not
only notwithstanding the common perils and fatigues of that tedious march, but though all
that generation of Israelites, except himself and Joshua, were one way or other cut off by
death. With what a grateful sense of God's goodness to him does he speak it! (v. 10). Now
behold (behold and wonder) the Lord hath kept me alive these forty and five years, thirty-
eight years in the wilderness, through the plagues of the desert, and seven years in Canaan
through the perils of war! Note, First, While we live, it is God that keeps us alive; by his
power he protects us from death, and by his bounty supplies us continually with the supports
140
Chapter XIV
and comforts of life. He holdeth our soul in life. Secondly, The longer we live the more
sensible we should be of God's goodness to us in keeping us alive, his care in prolonging
our frail lives, his patience in prolonging our forfeited lives. Has he kept me alive these forty-
five years? Is it about that time of life with us? Or is it more? Or is it less? We have reason
to say, It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed. How much are we indebted to
the favour of God, and what shall we render? Let the life thus kept by the providence of God
be devoted to his praise. Thirdly, The death of many others round about us should make us
the more thankful to God for sparing us and keeping us alive. Thousands falling on our
right hand and our left and yet ourselves spared. These distinguishing favours impose on
us strong obligations to singular obedience. [2.] That he was fit for business, now that he
was in Canaan. Though eighty-five years old, yet as hearty and lively as when he was forty
(v. 11): As my strength was then, so is it now. This was the fruit of the promise, and out-did
what was said; for God not only gives what he promises, but he gives more: life by promise
shall be life, and health, and strength, and all that which will make the promised life a
blessing and comfort. Moses had said in his prayer (Ps. xc. 10) that at eighty years old even
their strength is labour and sorrow, and so it is most commonly. But Caleb was an exception
to the rule; his strength at eighty-five was ease and joy: this he got by following the Lord fully.
Caleb here takes notice of this to the glory of God, and as an excuse for his asking a portion
which he must fetch out of the giants' hands. Let not Joshua tell him he knew not what he
asked; could he get the possession of that which he begged for a title to? "Yes," says he, "why
not? I am as fit for war now as ever I was."
(3.) The promise Moses had made him in God's name that he should have this mountain,
v. 9. This promise is his chief plea, and that on which he relies. As we find it (Num. xiv. 24)
it is general, him will I bring into the land whereunto he went, and his seed shall possess it;
but it seems it was more particular, and Joshua knew it; both sides understood this mountain
for which Caleb was now a suitor to be intended. This was the place from which, more than
any other, the spies took their report, for here they met with the sons of Anak (Num. xiii.
22), the sight of whom made such an impression upon them, v. 3. We may suppose that
Caleb, observing what stress they laid upon the difficulty of conquering Hebron, a city gar-
risoned by the giants, and how thence they inferred that the conquest of the whole land was
utterly impracticable, in opposition to their suggestions, and to convince the people that he
spoke as he thought, bravely desired to have that city which they called invincible assigned
to himself for his own portion: "I will undertake to deal with that, and, if I cannot get it for
my inheritance, I will be without." "Well," said Moses, "it shall be thy own then, win it and
wear it." Such a noble heroic spirit Caleb had, and so desirous was he to inspire his brethren
with it, that he chose this place only because it was the most difficult to be conquered. And,
to show that his soul did not decay any more than his body, now forty-five years after he
adheres to his choice and is still of the same mind.
141
Chapter XIV
(4.) The hopes he had of being master of it, though the sons of Anak were in possession
of it (v. 12): If the Lord will be with me, then I shall be able to drive them out. The city of
Hebron Joshua had already reduced (ch. x. 37), but the mountain which belonged to it, and
which was inhabited by the sons of Anak, was yet unconquered; for though the cutting off
of the Anakim from Hebron was mentioned ch. xi. 21, because the historian would relate
all the military actions together, yet it seems it was not conquered till after they had begun
to divide the land. Observe, He builds his hopes of driving out the sons of Anak upon the
presence of God with him. He does not say, "Because I am now as strong for war as I was
at forty, therefore I shall drive them out," depending upon his personal valour; nor does he
depend upon his interest in the warlike tribe of Judah, who attended him now in making
this address, and no doubt would assist him; nor does he court Joshua's aid, or put it upon
that, "If thou wilt be with me I shall gain my point." But, If the Lord will be with me. Here,
[1.] He seems to speak doubtfully of God's being with him, not from any distrust of his
goodness or faithfulness. He had spoken without the least hesitation of God's presence with
Israel in general (Num. xiv. 9); the Lord is with us. But for himself, from a humble sense of
his own unworthiness of such a favour, he chooses to express himself thus, If the Lord will
be with me. The Chaldee paraphrase reads it, If the Word of the Lord be my helper, that Word
which is God, and in the fulness of time was made flesh, and is the captain of our salvation.
[2.] But he expresses without the least doubt his assurance that if God were with him he
should be able to dispossess the sons of Anak. "If God be with us, If God be for us, who can
be against us, so as to prevail?" It is also intimated that if God were not with him, though
all the forces of Israel should come in to his assistance, he should not be able to gain his
point. Whatever we undertake, God's favourable presence with us is all in all to our success;
this therefore we must earnestly pray for, and carefully make sure of, by keeping ourselves
in the love of God; and on this we must depend, and from this take our encouragement
against the greatest difficulties.
3. Upon the whole matter, Caleb's request is (v. 12), Give me this mountain, (1.) Because
it was formerly in God's promise, and he would let Israel know how much he valued the
promise, insisting upon this mountain, whereof the Lord spake in that day, as most desirable,
though perhaps as good a portion might have fallen to him by lot in common with the rest.
Those that live by faith value that which is given by promise far above that which is given
by providence only. (2.) Because it was now in the Anakim's possession, and he would let
Israel know how little he feared the enemy, and would by his example animate them to push
on their conquests. Herein Caleb answered his name, which signifies all heart.
II. Joshua grants his petition (v. 13): Joshua blessed him, commended his bravery, ap-
plauded his request, and gave him what he asked. He also prayed for him, and for his good
success in his intended undertaking against the sons of Anak. Joshua was both a prince and
a prophet, and upon both accounts it was proper for him to give Caleb his blessing, for the
142
