Chapter XVI
  7 And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jericho, and
went out at Jordan.   8 The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah;
and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Ephraim by their families.   9 And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were
among the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.   10 And
they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canaanites dwell among the
Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under tribute.
Here, 1. The border of the lot of Ephraim is set down, by which it was divided on the
south from Benjamin and Dan, who lay between it and Judah, and on the north from
Manasseh; for east and west it reached from Jordan to the great sea. The learned, who aim
to be exact in drawing the line according to the directions here, find themselves very much
at a loss, the description being short and intricate. The report of those who in these latter
ages have travelled those countries will not serve to clear the difficulties, so vastly unlike is
it now to what it was then; not only cities have been so destroyed as that no mark nor footstep
of them remains, but brooks are dried up, rivers alter their courses, and even the mountain
falling cometh to nought, and the rock is removed out of his place, Job xiv. 18. Unless I could
hope to solve the doubts that arise upon this draught of the border of Ephraim, it is to no
purpose to mention them: no doubt it was then perfectly understood, so as that the first
intention of recording it was effectually answered, which was to notify the ancient landmarks,
which posterity must by no means remove. 2. Some separate cities are spoken of, that lay
not within these borders, at least not if the line was drawn direct, but lay within the lot of
Manasseh (v. 9), which might better be read, and there were separate cities for the children
of Ephraim among the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, because it proved that Man-
asseh could spare them, and Ephraim had need of them, and it might be hoped that no in-
convenience would arise from this mixture of these two tribes together, who were both the
sons of Joseph, and should love as brethren. And by this it appears that though, when the
tribes were numbered in the plains of Moab, Manasseh had got the start of Ephraim in
number, for Manasseh was then 52,000, and Ephraim but 32,000 (Num. xxvi. 34, 37), yet
by the time they were well settled in Canaan the hands were crossed again, and the blessing
of Moses was verified, Deut. xxxiii. 17, They are the ten thousands of Ephraim and they are
the thousands of Manasseh. Families and kingdoms are diminished and increased, increased
and diminished again, as God pleases. 3. A brand is put upon the Ephraimites, that they did
not drive out the Canaanites from Gezer (v. 10), either through carelessness or cowardice,
either for want of faith in the promise of God, that he would give them success if they would
make a vigorous effort, or for want of zeal for the command of God, which obliged them
utterly to drive out the Canaanites, and to make no peace with them. And, though they
hoped to satisfy the law by putting them under tribute, yet (as Calvin thinks) this made the
matter worse, for it shows that they spared them out of covetousness, that they might be
153
Chapter XVI
profited by their labours, and by dealing with them for their tribute they were in danger of
being infected with their idolatry; yet some think that, when they brought them under
tribute, they obliged them to renounce their idols, and to observe the seven precepts of the
sons of Noah; and I should think so, but that we find in the sequel of the story that the Is-
raelites were so far from restraining idolatry in others that they soon fell into it themselves.
Many famous places were within this lot of the tribe of Ephraim, though not mentioned
here. In it were Ramah, Samuel's city (called in the New Testament Arimathea, of which
Joseph was, that took care of our Saviour's burial), and Shiloh, where the tabernacle was
first set up. Tirzah also, the royal city of Jeroboam and his successors, and Deborah's palm-
tree, under which she judged Israel, were in this tribe. Samaria, built by Omri after the
burning of the royal palace of Tirzah, was in this tribe, and was long the royal city of the
kingdom of the ten tribes; not far from it were Shechem, and the mountains Ebal and Ger-
izim, and Sychar, near which was Jacob's well, where Christ talked with the woman of
Samaria. We read much of Mount Ephraim in the story of the Judges, and of a city called
Ephraim, it is probable in this tribe, to which Christ retired, John xi. 54. The whole kingdom
of the ten tribes is often, in the prophets, especially in Hosea, called Ephraim.
154
Chapter XVII
Chapter XVII
J O S H U A
CHAP. XVII.
The half tribe of Manasseh comes next to be provided for; and here we have, I. The
families of that tribe that were to be portioned, ver. 1-6. II. The country that fell to their lot,
ver. 7-13. III. The joint request of the two tribes that descended from Joseph, for the enlarge-
ment of their lot, and Joshua's answer to that request, ver. 14-18.
The Inheritance of Joseph's Children. (b. c. 1444.)
1 There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the firstborn of Joseph; to
wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead: because he was a man of
war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.   2 There was also a lot for the rest of the children
of Manasseh by their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek,
and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of
Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these were the male children of Manasseh the son
of Joseph by their families.   3 But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the
son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are the names
of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.   4 And they came near
before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying,
The Lord commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore ac-
cording to the commandment of the Lord he gave them an inheritance among the brethren
of their father.   5 And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead and
Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan;   6 Because the daughters of Manasseh had
an inheritance among his sons: and the rest of Manasseh's sons had the land of Gilead.
Manasseh was itself but one half of the tribe of Joseph, and yet was divided and sub-
divided. 1. It was divided into two parts, one already settled on the other side Jordan, con-
sisting of those who were the posterity of Machir, v. 1. This Machir was born to Manasseh
in Egypt; there he had signalized himself as a man of war, probably in the contests between
the Ephraimites and the men of Gath, 1 Chron. vii. 21. His warlike disposition descended
to his posterity, and therefore Moses gave them Gilead and Bashan, on the other side Jordan,
of which before, ch. xiii. 31. It is here said that the lot came to Manasseh, for he was the first-
born of Joseph. Bishop Patrick thinks it should be translated, though he was the first-born
of Joseph, and then the meaning is plain, that the second lot was for Manasseh, because,
though he was the first-born, yet Jacob had preferred Ephraim before him. See the names
of those heads of the families that settled on the other side Jordan, 1 Chron. v. 24. 2. That
part on this side Jordan as subdivided into ten families, v. 5. There were six sons of Gilead
here named (v. 2), the same that are recorded Num. xxvi. 30-32, only that he who is there
called Jezeer is here called Abiezer. Five of these sons had each of them their portion; the
sixth, which was Hepher, had his male line cut off in his son Zelophehad, who left daughters
155
Chapter XVII
only, five in number, of whom we have often read, and these five had each of them a portion;
though perhaps, they claiming under Hepher, all their five portions were but equal to one
of the portions of the five sons. Or if Hepher had other sons besides Zelophehad, in whom
the name of his family was kept up, their posterity married to the daughters of Zelophehad
the elder brother, and in their right had these portions assigned them. See Num. xxxvi. 12.
Here is, (1.) The claim which the daughters of Zelophehad made, grounded upon the com-
mand God gave to Moses concerning them, v. 4. They had themselves, when they were
young, pleaded their own cause before Moses, and obtained the grant of an inheritance with
their brethren, and now they would not lose the benefit of that grant for want of speaking
to Joshua, but seasonably put in their demand themselves, as it should seem, and not their
husbands for them. (2.) The assignment of their portions according to their claim. Joshua
knew very well what God had ordered in their case, and did not object that they having not
served in the wars of Canaan there was no reason why they should share in the possessions
of Canaan, but readily gave them as inheritance among the brethren of their father. And now
they reaped the benefit of their own pious zeal and prudent forecast in this matter. Thus
those who take care in the wilderness of this world to make sure to themselves a place in
the inheritance of the saints in light will certainly have the comfort of it in the other world,
while those that neglect it now will lose it for ever.
  7 And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lieth before Shechem;
and the border went along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of En-tappuah.   8 Now
Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged to
the children of Ephraim;   9 And the coast descended unto the river Kanah, southward of
the river: these cities of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh
also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were at the sea:   10 Southward
it was Ephraim's, and northward it was Manasseh's, and the sea is his border; and they met
together in Asher on the north, and in Issachar on the east.   11 And Manasseh had in Issachar
and in Asher Beth-shean and her towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of
Dor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants of
Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns, even three countries.
  12 Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants of those cities; but the
Canaanites would dwell in that land.   13 Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel
were waxen strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute; but did not utterly drive them
out.
We have here a short account of the lot of this half tribe. It reached from Jordan on the
east to the great sea on the west; on the south it lay all along contiguous to Ephraim, but on
the north it abutted upon Asher and Issachar. Asher lay north-west, and Issachar north-
east, which seems to be the meaning of that (v. 10), that they (that is, Manasseh and Ephraim,
as related to it, both together making the tribe of Joseph) met in Asher on the north and
156
Chapter XVII
Issachar on the east, for Ephraim itself reached not those tribes. Some things are particularly
observed concerning this lot:—1. That there was great communication between this tribe
and that of Ephraim. The city of Tappuah belonged to Ephraim, but the country adjoining
to Manasseh (v. 8); there were likewise many cities of Ephraim that lay within the border
of Manasseh (v. 9), of which before, ch. xvi. 9. 2. That Manasseh likewise had cities with
their appurtenances in the tribes of Issachar and Asher (v. 11), God so ordering it, that
though every tribe had its peculiar inheritance, which might not be alienated from it, yet
they should thus intermix one with another, to keep up mutual acquaintance and corres-
pondence among the tribes, and to give occasion for the doing of good offices one to another,
as became those who, though of different tribes, were all one Israel, and were bound to love
as brethren. 3. That they suffered the Canaanites to live among them, contrary to the com-
mand of God, serving their own ends by conniving at them, for they made them tributaries,
v. 12, 13. The Ephraimites had done the same (ch. xvi. 10), and from them perhaps the
Manassites learned it, and with their example excused themselves in it. The most remarkable
person of this half tribe in after-time was Gideon, whose great actions were done within
this lot. He was of the family of Abiezer; Cesarea was in this lot, and Antipatris, famed in
the latter ages of the Jewish state.
  14 And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast thou given me but
one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a great people, forasmuch as the Lord hath
blessed me hitherto?   15 And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee
up to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of
the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.   16 And the children of Joseph said,
The hill is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have
chariots of iron, both they who are of Beth-shean and her towns, and they who are of the
valley of Jezreel.   17 And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to
Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power: thou shalt not have one
lot only:   18 But the mountain shall be thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down:
and the outgoings of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they
have iron chariots, and though they be strong.
Here, I. The children of Joseph quarrel with their lot; if they had had any just cause to
quarrel with it, we have reason to think Joshua would have relieved them, by adding to it,
or altering it, which it does not appear he did. It is probable, because Joshua was himself of
the tribe of Ephraim, they promised themselves that they should have some particular favour
shown them, and should not be confined to the decision of the lot so closely as the other
tribes; but Joshua makes them know that in the discharge of his office, as a public person,
he had no more regard to his own tribe than to any other, but would administer impartially,
without favour or affection, wherein he has left an excellent example to all in public trusts.
It was a very competent provision that was made for them, as much, for aught that appears,
157
Chapter XVII
as they were able to manage, and yet they call it in disdain but one lot, as if that which was
assigned to them both was scarcely sufficient for one. The word for complainers (Jude 16)
is mempsimoiroi, blamers of their lot:—1. That they were very numerous, through the
blessing of God upon them (v. 14): I am a great people, for the Lord has blessed me; and we
have reason to hope that he that hath sent mouths will send meat. "I am a great people, and
in so small a lot shall not have room to thrive." Yet observe, when they speak thankfully of
their present increase, they do not speak confidently of the continuance of it. "The Lord has
blessed me hitherto, however he may see fit to deal with me for the future." The uncertainty
of what may be must not make us unthankful for what has been and is done in kindness to
us. 2. That a good part of that country which had now fallen to their lot was in the hands of
the Canaanites, and that they were formidable enemies, who brought into the field of battle
chariots of iron (v. 16), that is, chariots with long scythes fastened to the sides of them, or
the axle-tree, which made great destruction of all that came in their way, mowing them
down like corn. They urge that though they had a good portion assigned them, yet it was
in bad hands, and they could not come to the possession of it, wishing to have their lot in
those countries that were more thoroughly reduced than this was.
II. Joshua endeavours to reconcile them to their lot. He owns they were a great people,
and being two tribes ought to have more than one lot only (v. 17), but tells them that what
had fallen to their share would be a sufficient lot for them both, if they would but work and
fight. They desired a lot in which they might indulge themselves in ease and luxury. "No,"
says Joshua, "you must not count upon that; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread is
a sentence in force even in Canaan itself." He retorts their own argument, that they were a
great people. "If so, you are the better able to help yourselves, and have the less reason to
expect help from others. If thou hast many mouths to be filled, thou hast twice as many
hands to be employed; earn, and then eat." 1. He bids them work for more (v. 15): "Get thee
up to the wood-country, which is within thy own border, and let all hands be set to work to
cut down the trees, rid the rough lands, and make them, with art and industry, good arable
ground." Note, Many wish for larger possessions who do not cultivate and make the best of
what they have, think they should have more talents given them who do not trade with those
with which they are entrusted. Most people's poverty is the effect of their idleness; would
they dig, they need not beg. 2. He bids them fight for more (v. 17, 18), when they pleaded
that they could not come at the wood-lands he spoke of because in the valley between them
and it were Canaanites whom they durst not enter the lists with. "Never fear them," said
Joshua, "thou hast God on thy side, and thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, if thou wilt set
about it in good earnest, though they have iron chariots." We straiten ourselves by apprehend-
ing the difficulties in the way of our enlargement to be greater than really they are. What
can be insuperable to faith and holy resolution?
158
