Chapter I
which had not yet ceased, must prepare it and have it ready against the time appointed.
Perhaps, though the manna did not quite cease till they came into Canaan (ch. v. 12), yet
since they had come into a land inhabited (Exod. xvi. 35), where they might be furnished
in part with other provisions, it did not fall so plentifully, nor did they gather so much as
when they had it first given to them in the wilderness, but decreased gradually, and therefore
they are ordered to provide other victuals, in which perhaps was included all other things
necessary to their march. And some of the Jewish writer, considering that having manna
they needed not to provide other victuals, understand it figuratively, that they must repent
of their sins, and make their peace with God, and resolve to live a new life, that they might
be ready to receive this great favour. See Exod. xix. 10, 11.
II. He reminds the two tribes and a half of the obligations they were under to go over
Jordan with their brethren, though they left their possessions and families on this side. Interest
would make the other tribes glad to go over Jordan, but in these it was an act of self-denial,
and against the grain; therefore it was needful to produce the agreement which Moses had
made with them, when he gave them their possession before their brethren (v. 13): Remember
the word which Moses commanded you. Some of them perhaps were ready to think now that
Moses was dead, who they thought was too hard upon them in this matter, they might find
some excuse or other to release themselves from this engagement, or might prevail with
Joshua to dispense with them; but he holds them to it, and lets them know that, though
Moses was dead, his commands and their promises were still in full force. He reminds them,
1. Of the advantages they had received in being first settled: "The Lord your God hath given
you rest. He has given your minds rest; you know what you have to trust to, and are not as
the rest of the tribes waiting the issue of the war first and then of the lot. He has also given
your families rest, your wives and children, whose settlement is your satisfaction. He has
given you rest by giving you this land, this good land, of which you are in full and quiet
possession." Note, When God by his providence has given us rest we ought to consider how
we may honour him with the advantages of it, and what service we may do to our brethren
who are unsettled, or not so well settled as we are. When God had given David rest (2 Sam.
vii. 1), see how restless he was till he had found out a habitation for the ark, Ps. cxxxii. 4, 5.
When God has given us rest, we must take heed of slothfulness and of settling upon our
lees. 2. He reminds them of their agreement to help their brethren in the wars of Canaan
till God had in like manner given them rest, v. 14, 15. This was, (1.) Reasonable in itself. So
closely were all the tribes incorporated that they must needs look upon themselves as
members one of another. (2.) It was enjoined them by Moses, the servant of the Lord; he
commanded them to do this, and Joshua his successor would see his commands observed.
(3.) It was the only expedient they had to save themselves from the guilt of a great sin in
settling on that side Jordan, a sin which would one time or other find them out, Num. xxxii.
23. (4.) It was the condition of the grant Moses had made them of the land they were pos-
18
Chapter I
sessed of, so that they could not be sure of a good title to, or a comfortable enjoyment of,
the land of their possession, as it is here called (v. 15), if they did not fulfil the condition. (5.)
They themselves had covenanted and agreed thereunto (Num. xxxii. 25): Thy servants will
do as my Lord commandeth. Thus we all lie under manifold obligations to strengthen the
hands one of another, and not to seek our own welfare only, but one another's.
The Reubenites' Answer. (b. c. 1451.)
16 And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.   17 According as we hearkened unto Moses in
all things, so will we hearken unto thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with
Moses.   18 Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken
unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death: only be strong
and of a good courage.
This answer was given not by the two tribes and a half only (though they are spoken of
immediately before), but by the officers of all the people (v. 10), as their representatives,
concurring with the divine appointment, by which Joshua was set over them, and they did
it heartily, and with a great deal of cheerfulness and resolution.
I. They promise him obedience (v. 16), not only as subjects to their prince, but as soldiers
to their general, of whose particular orders they are to be observant. He that hath soldiers
under him saith to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh, Matt.
viii. 9. Thus the people of Joshua; "All that thou commandest us we will readily do, without
murmuring or disputing; and whithersoever thou sends us, though upon the most difficult
and perilous expedition, we will go." We must thus swear allegiance to our Lord Jesus, as
the captain of our salvation, and bind ourselves to do what he commands us by his word,
and to go where he sends us by his providence. And since Joshua, being humbly conscious
to himself how far short he came of Moses, feared he should not have such an influence
upon the people and such an interest in them as Moses had, they here promise that they
will be as obedient to him as ever they had been to Moses, v. 17. To speak truth, they had
no reason to boast of their obedience to Moses; he had found them a stiff-necked people,
Deut. ix. 24. But they meant that they would be as observant of Joshua as they should have
been, and as some of them were (and the generality of them at least sometimes) of Moses.
Note, We must not so magnify those that are gone, how eminent soever they were, either
in the magistracy or in the ministry, as to be wanting in the honour and duty we owe to
those that survive and succeed them, though in gifts they may come short of them. Obedience
for conscience' sake will continue, though Providence change the hands by which it rules
and acts.
II. They pray for the presence of God with him (v. 17): "Only the Lord thy God be with
thee, to bless and prosper thee, and give thee success, as he was with Moses." Prayers and
supplications are to be made for all in authority, 1 Tim. ii. 1, 2. And the best thing we can
19
Chapter I
ask of God for our magistrates is that they may have the presence of God with them; this
will make them blessings to us, so that in seeking this for them we consult our own interest.
A reason is here intimated why they would obey him as they had obeyed Moses, because
they believed (and in faith prayed) that God's presence would be with him as it was with
Moses. Those that we have reason to think have favour from God should have honour and
respect from us. Some understand it as a limitation of their obedience: "We will obey only
as far as we perceive the Lord is with thee, but no further. While thou keepest close to God
we will keep close to thee; hitherto shall our obedience come, but no further." But they were
so far from having any suspicion of Joshua's deviating from the divine rule that there needed
not such a proviso.
III. They pass an act to make it death for any Israelite to disobey Joshua's orders, or
rebel against his commandment, v. 18. Perhaps if such a law had been made in Moses's time
it might have prevented many of the rebellions that were formed against him; for most men
fear the sword of the magistrate more than the justice of God. Yet there was a special reason
for the making of this law now that they were entering upon the wars of Canaan; for in times
of war the severity of military discipline is more necessary than at other times. Some think
that in this statute they had an eye to that law concerning the prophet God would raise up
like unto Moses, which they think, though it refer chiefly to Christ, yet takes in Joshua by
the way as a type of him, that whosoever would not hearken to him should be cut off from
his people. Deut. xviii. 19, I will require it of him.
IV. They animate him to go on with cheerfulness in the work to which God had called
him; and, in desiring that he would be strong and of a good courage, they did in effect
promise him that they would do all they could, by an exact, bold, and cheerful observance
of all his orders, to encourage him. It very much heartens those that lead in a good work to
see those that follow follow with a good will. Joshua, though of approved valour, did not
take it as an affront, but as a great kindness, for the people to bid him be strong and of a
good courage.
20
Chapter II
Chapter II
J O S H U A
CHAP. II.
In this chapter we have an account of the scouts that were employed to bring an account
to Joshua of the posture of the city of Jericho. Observe here, I. How Joshua sent them, ver.
1. II. How Rahab received them, and protected them, and told a lie for them (ver. 2-7), so
that they escaped out of the hands of the enemy. III. The account she gave them of the
present posture of Jericho, and the panic-fear they were struck with upon the approach of
Israel, ver. 8-11. IV. The bargain she made with them for the security of herself and her re-
lations in the ruin she saw coming upon her city, ver. 12-21. V. Their safe return to Joshua,
and the account they gave him of their expedition, ver. 22-24. And that which makes this
story most remarkable is that Rahab, the person principally concerned in it, is twice celebrated
in the New Testament as a great believer (Heb. xi. 31) and as one whose faith proved itself
by good works, James ii. 25.
The Two Spies and Rahab. (b. c. 1451.)
1 And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy secretly, saying, Go
view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and came into a harlot's house, named Rahab,
and lodged there.   2 And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came men in
hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the country.   3 And the king of Jericho
sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men that are come to thee, which are entered into
thine house: for they be come to search out all the country.   4 And the woman took the two
men, and hid them, and said thus, There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they
were:   5 And it came to pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that
the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them quickly; for ye shall
overtake them.   6 But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with
the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.   7 And the men pursued after
them the way to Jordan unto the fords: and as soon as they which pursued after them were
gone out, they shut the gate.
In these verses we have,
I. The prudence of Joshua, in sending spies to observe this important pass, which was
likely to be disputed at the entrance of Israel into Canaan (v. 1). Go view the land, even
Jericho. Moses had sent spies (Num. xiii.) Joshua himself was one of them and it proved of
ill consequence. Yet Joshua now sent spies, not, as the former were sent, to survey the whole
land, but Jericho only; not to bring the account to the whole congregation, but to Joshua
only, who, like a watchful general, was continually projecting for the public good, and, was
particularly careful to take the first step well and not to stumble at the threshold. It was not
fit that Joshua should venture over Jordan, to make his remarks incognito—in disguise; but
he sends two men (two young men, says the LXX.), to view the land, that from their report
21
Chapter II
he might take his measures in attacking Jericho. Observe, 1. There is no remedy, but great
men must see with other people's eyes, which makes it very necessary that they be cautious
in the choice of those they employ, since so much often depends upon their fidelity. 2. Faith
in God's promise ought not to supersede but encourage our diligence in the use of proper
means. Joshua is sure he has God with him, and yet sends men before him. We do not trust
God, but tempt him, if our expectations slacken our endeavours. 3. See how ready these
men were to go upon this hazardous enterprise. Though they put their lives in their hands
yet they ventured in obedience to Joshua their general, in zeal for the service of the camp,
and in dependence upon the power of that God who, being the keeper of Israel in general,
is the protector of every particular Israelite in the way of his duty.
II. The providence of God directing the spies to the house of Rahab. How they got over
Jordan we are not told; but into Jericho they came, which was about seven or eight miles
from the river, and there seeking for a convenient inn were directed to the house of Rahab,
here called a harlot, a woman that had formerly been of ill fame, the reproach of which stuck
to her name, though of late she had repented and reformed. Simon the leper (Matt. xxvi.
6), though cleansed from his leprosy, wore the reproach of it in his name at long as he lived;
so Rahab the harlot; and she is so called in the New Testament, where both her faith and
her good works are praised, to teach us, 1. That the greatness of sin is no bar to pardoning
mercy if it be truly repented of in time. We read of publicans and harlots entering into the
kingdom of the Messiah, and being welcomed to all the privileged of that kingdom, Matt.
xxi. 31. 2. That there are many who before their conversion were very wicked and vile, and
yet afterwards come to great eminence in faith and holiness. 3. Even those that through
grace have repented of the sins of their youth must expect to bear the reproach of them, and
when they hear of their old faults must renew their repentance, and, as an evidence of that,
hear of them patiently. God's Israel, for aught that appears, had but one friend, but one well-
wisher in all Jericho, and that was Rahab a harlot. God has often served his own purposes
and his church's interests by men of different morals. Had these scouts gone to any other
house than this they would certainly have been betrayed and put to death without mercy.
But God knew where they had a friend that would be true to them, though they did not,
and directed them thither. Thus that which seems to us most contingent and accidental is
often over-ruled by the divine providence to serve its great ends. And those that faithfully
acknowledge God in their ways he will guide with his eye. See Jer. xxxvi. 19, 26.
III. The piety of Rahab in receiving and protecting these Israelites. Those that keep
public-houses entertain all comers, and think themselves obliged to be civil to their guests.
But Rahab showed her guests more than common civility, and went upon an uncommon
principle in what she did; it was by faith that she received those with peace against whom
her king and country had denounced war, Heb. xi. 31. 1. She bade them welcome to her
house; they lodged there, though it appears by what she said to them (v. 9) she knew both
22
Chapter II
whence they came and what their business was. 2. Perceiving that they were observed
coming into the city, and that umbrage was taken at it, she hid them upon the roof of the
house, which was flat, and covered them with stalks of flax (v. 6), so that, if the officers
should come thither to search for them, there they might lie undiscovered. By these stalks
of flax, which she herself had lain in order upon the roof to dry in the sun, in order to the
beating of it and making it ready for the wheel, it appears she had one of the good characters
of the virtuous woman, however in others of them she might be deficient, that she sought
wool and flax, and wrought willingly with her hands, Prov. xxxi. 13. From this instance of
her honest industry one would hope that, whatever she had been formerly, she was not now
a harlot. 3. When she was examined concerning them, she denied they were in her house,
turned off the officers that had a warrant to search for them with a sham, and so secured
them. No marvel that the king of Jericho sent to enquire after them (v. 2, 3); he had cause
to fear when the enemy was at his door, and his fear made him suspicious and jealous of all
strangers. He had reason to demand from Rahab that she should bring forth the men to be
dealt with as spies; but Rahab not only disowned that she knew them, or knew where they
were, but, that no further search might be made for them in the city, told the pursuers they
had gone away again and in all probability might be overtaken, v. 4, 5. Now, (1.) We are
sure this was a good work: it is canonized by the apostle (James ii. 25), where she is said to
be justified by works, and this is specified, that she received the messengers, and sent them
out another way, and she did it by faith, such a faith as set her above the fear of man, even
of the wrath of the king. She believed, upon the report she had heard of the wonders wrought
for Israel, that their God was the only true God, and that therefore their declared design
upon Canaan would undoubtedly take effect and in this faith she sided with them, protected
them, and courted their favour. Had she said, "I believe God is yours and Canaan yours, but
I dare not show you any kindness," her faith had been dead and inactive, and would not
have justified her. But by this it appeared to be both alive and lively, that she exposed herself
to the utmost peril, even of life, in obedience to her faith. Note, Those only are true believers
that can find in their hearts to venture for God; and those that by faith take the Lord for
their God take his people for their people, and cast in their lot among them. Those that have
God for their refuge and hiding-place must testify their gratitude by their readiness to
shelter his people when there is occasion. Let my outcasts dwell with thee, Isa. xvi. 3, 4. And
we must be glad of an opportunity of testifying the sincerity and zeal of our love to God by
hazardous services to his church and kingdom among men. But, (2.) There is that in it which
it is not easy to justify, and yet it must be justified, or else it could not be so good a work as
to justify her. [1.] It is plain that she betrayed her country by harbouring the enemies of it,
and aiding those that were designing its destruction, which could not consist with her alle-
giance to her prince and her affection and duty to the community she was a member of. But
that which justifies her in this is that she knew the Lord had given Israel this land (v. 9), knew
23
Chapter II
it by the incontestable miracles God had wrought for them, which confirmed that grant;
and her obligations to God were higher than her obligations to any other. If she knew God
had given them this land, it would have been a sin to join with those that hindered them
from possessing it. But, since no such grant of any land to any people can now be proved,
this will by no means justify any such treacherous practices against the public welfare. [2.]
It is plain that she deceived the officers that examined her with an untruth—That she knew
not whence the men were, that they had gone out, that she knew not whither they had gone.
What shall we say to this? If she had either told the truth or been silent, she would have be-
trayed the spies, and this would certainly have been a great sin; and it does not appear that
she had any other way of concealing them that by this ironical direction to the officers to
pursue them another way, which if they would suffer themselves to be deceived by, let them
be deceived. None are bound to accuse themselves, or their friends, of that which, though
enquired after as a crime, they know to be a virtue. This case was altogether extraordinary,
and therefore cannot be drawn into a precedent; and that my be justified here which would
be by no means lawful in a common case. Rahab knew, by what was already done on the
other side Jordan, that no mercy was to be shown to the Canaanites, and thence inferred
that, if mercy was not owing them, truth was not; those that might be destroyed might be
deceived. Yet divines generally conceive that it was a sin, which however admitted of this
extenuation, that being a Canaanite she was not better taught the evil of lying; but God ac-
cepted her faith and pardoned her infirmity. However it was in this case, we are sure it is
our duty to speak every man the truth to his neighbour, to dread and detest lying, and never
to do evil, that evil, that good may come of it, Rom. iii. 8. But God accepts what is sincerely
and honestly intended, though there be a mixture of frailty and folly in it, and is not extreme
to mark what we do amiss. Some suggest that what she said might possibly be true of some
other men.
8 And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof;   9 And she
said unto the men, I know that the Lord hath given you the land, and that your terror is
fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you.   10 For we have
heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red sea for you, when ye came out of Egypt;
and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon
and Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.   11 And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts
did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you: for the
Lord your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath.   12 Now therefore, I pray
you, swear unto me by the Lord, since I have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew
kindness unto my father's house, and give me a true token:   13 And that ye will save alive
my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and all that they have, and
deliver our lives from death.   14 And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter
not this our business. And it shall be, when the Lord hath given us the land, that we will
24
Chapter II
deal kindly and truly with thee.   15 Then she let them down by a cord through the window:
for her house was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.   16 And she said unto
them, Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three
days, until the pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way.   17 And the men
said unto her, We will be blameless of this thine oath which thou hast made us swear.   18
Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the window
which thou didst let us down by: and thou shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy
brethren, and all thy father's household, home unto thee.   19 And it shall be, that whosoever
shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and
we will be guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our
head, if any hand be upon him.   20 And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit
of thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.   21 And she said, According unto your
words, so be it. And she sent them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line
in the window.
The matter is here settled between Rahab and the spies respecting the service she was
now to do for them, and the favour they were afterwards to show to her. She secures them
on condition that they should secure her.
I. She gives them, and by them sends to Joshua and Israel, all the encouragement that
could be desired to make their intended descent upon Canaan. This was what they came
for, and it was worth coming for. Having got clear of the officers, she comes up to them to
the roof of the house where they lay hid, finds them perhaps somewhat dismayed at the
peril they apprehended themselves in from the officers, and scarcely recovered from the
fright, but has that to say to them which will give them abundant satisfaction. 1. She lets
them know that the report of the great things God had done for them had come to Jericho
(v. 10), not only that they had an account of their late victories obtained over the Amorites
in the neighbouring country, on the other side of the river, but that their miraculous deliv-
erance out of Egypt, and passage through the Red Sea, a great way off, and forty years ago,
were remembered and talked of afresh in Jericho, to the amazement of every body. Thus
this Joshua and his fellows were men wondered at, Zech. iii. 8. See how God makes his
wonderful works to be remembered (Ps. cxi. 4), so that men shall speak of the might of his
terrible acts, Ps. cxlv. 6. 2. She tells them what impressions the tidings of these things had
made upon the Canaanites: Your terror has fallen upon us (v. 9); our hearts did melt, v. 11.
If she kept a public house, this would give her an opportunity of understanding the sense
of various companies and of travellers from other parts of the country, so that they could
not know this any way better than by her information; and it would be of great use to Joshua
and Israel to know it; it would put courage into the most cowardly Israelite to hear how
their enemies were dispirited, and it was easy to conclude that those who now fainted before
them would infallibly fall before them, especially because it was the accomplishment of a
25
Chapter II
promise God had made them, that he would lay the fear and dread of them upon all this
land (Deut. xi. 25), and so it would be an earnest of the accomplishment of all the other
promises God had made to them. Let not the stout man glory in his courage, any more than
the strong man in his strength; for God can weaken both mind and body. Let not God's Israel
be afraid of their most powerful enemies; for their God can, when he pleases, make their
most powerful enemies afraid of them. Let none think to harden their hearts against God
and prosper; for he that made man's soul can at any time make the sword of his terrors ap-
proach to it. 3. She hereupon makes profession of her faith in God and his promise; and
perhaps there was not found so great faith (all things considered), no, not in Israel, as in this
woman of Canaan. (1.) who believes God's power and dominion over all the world (v. 11):
"Jehovah your God, whom you worship and call upon, is so far above all gods that he is the
only true God; for he is God in heaven above and in earth beneath, and is served by all the
hosts of both." A vast distance there is between heaven and earth, yet both are equally under
the inspection and government of the great Jehovah. Heaven is not above his power, nor is
earth below his cognizance. (2.) She believes his promise to his people Israel (v. 9): I know
that the Lord hath given you the land. The king of Jericho had heard as much as she had of
the great things God had done for Israel, yet he cannot infer thence that the Lord had given
them this land, but resolves to hold it out against them to the last extremity; for the most
powerful means of conviction will not of themselves attain the end without divine grace,
and by that grace Rahab the harlot, who had only heard of the wonders God had wrought,
speaks with more assurance of the truth of the promise made to the fathers than all the
elders of Israel had done who were eye-witnesses of those wonders, many of whom perished
through unbelief of this promise. Blessed are those that have not seen, and yet have believed;
so Rahab did. O woman, great is thy faith!
II. She engaged them to take her and her relations under their protection, that they
might not perish in the destruction of Jericho, v. 12, 13. Now, 1. It was an evidence of the
sincerity and strength of her faith concerning the approaching revolution in her country
that she was so solicitous to make an interest for herself with the Israelites, and courted their
kindness. She foresaw the conquest of her country, and in the belief of that bespoke in time
the favour of the conquerors. Thus Noah, being moved with fear, prepared an ark to the
saving of his house, and the condemning of the world, Heb. xi. 7. Those who truly believe the
divine revelation concerning the ruin of sinners, and the grant of the heavenly land to God's
Israel, will give diligence to flee from the wrath to come, and to lay hold of eternal life, by
joining themselves to God and to his people. 2. The provision she made for the safety of her
relations, as well as for her own, is a laudable instance of natural affection, and an intimation
to us in like manner to do all we can for the salvation of the souls of those that are dear to
us, and, with ourselves, to bring them, if possible, into the bond of the covenant. No mention
is made of her husband and children, but only her parents, and brothers, and sisters, for
26
