Chapter X
the country they had now conquered; but he soon finds he has more work cut out for him.
The victory must be pursued, that the spoils might be divided. Accordingly he applies
himself to it with renewed vigour.
I. The forces that had dispersed themselves must be followed and smitten. When tidings
were brought to Joshua where the kings were he ordered a guard to be set upon them for
the present (v. 18), reserving them for another day of destruction, and to be brought forth to
a day of wrath, Job xxi. 30. He directs his men to pursue the common soldiers, as much as
might be, to prevent their escaping to the garrisons, which would strengthen them, and
make the reduction of them the more difficult, v. 19. Like a prudent general, he does that
first which is most needful, and defers his triumphs till he has completed his conquests; nor
was he in such haste to insult over the captive kings but that he would first prevent the ral-
lying again of their scattered forces. The result of this vigorous pursuit was, 1. That a very
great slaughter was made of the enemies of God and Israel. And, 2. The field was cleared of
them, so that none remained but such as got into fenced cities, where they would not long
be safe themselves, nor were they capable of doing any service to the cities that sheltered
them, unless they could have left their fears behind them. 3. None moved his tongue against
any of the children of Israel, v. 21. This expression intimates, (1.) Their perfect safety and
tranquillity; some think it should be read (from Exod. xi. 7), Against any of the children of
Israel did not a dog move his tongue; no, not against any one man of them. They were not
threatened by any danger at all after their victory, no, not so much as the barking of a dog.
Not one single Israelite (for the original makes it so particular) was brought into any distress,
either in the battle or in the pursuit. (2.) Their honour and reputation; no man had any re-
proach to cast upon them, nor an ill word to give them. God not only tied the hands, but
stopped the mouths, of their enraged enemies, and put lying lips to silence. (3.) The Chaldee
paraphrase makes it an expression of their unalloyed joy for this victory, reading it, There
was no hurt nor loss to the children of Israel, for which any man should afflict his soul. When
the army came to be reviewed after the battle, there was none slain, none wounded, none
missing. Not one Israelite had occasion to lament either the loss of a friend or the loss of a
limb, so cheap, so easy, so glorious, was this victory.
II. The kings that had hidden themselves must now be called to an account, as rebels
against the Israel of God, to whom, by the divine promise and grant, this land did of right
belong and should have been surrendered upon demand. See here,
1. How they were secured. The cave which they fled to, and trusted in for a refuge, became
their prison, in which they were clapped up, till Joshua sat in judgment on them, v. 18. It
seems they all escaped both the hail-stones and the sword, God so ordering it, not in kindness
to them, but that they might be reserved for a more solemn and terrible execution; as, for
this cause, Pharaoh survived the plagues of Egypt, and was made to stand, that God might
in him show his power, Exod. ix. 16. They all fled, and met at the same place, Providence
114
Chapter X
directing them; and now those who were lately consulting against Israel were put upon new
counsels to preserve themselves and agreed to take shelter in the same cave. The information
brought to Joshua of this is an evidence that there were those of the country, who knew the
holes and fastnesses of it, that were in his interests. And the care Joshua took to keep them
there when they were there, as it is an instance of his policy and presence of mind, even in
the heat of action, so, in the result of their project, it shows how those not only deceive
themselves, but destroy themselves, who think to hide themselves from God. Their refuge
of lies will but bind them over to God's judgment.
2. How they were triumphed over. Joshua ordered them to be brought forth out of the
cave, set before him as at the bar, and their names called over, v. 22, 23. And when they
either were bound and cast upon the ground unable to help themselves, or threw themselves
upon the ground, humbly to beg for their lives, he called for the general officers and great
men, and commanded them to trample upon these kings, and set their feet upon their necks,
not in sport and to make themselves and the company merry, but with the gravity and de-
corum that became the ministers of the divine justice who were not herein to gratify any
pride or passion of their own, but to give glory to the God of Israel as higher than the highest,
who treads upon princes as mortar (Isa. xli. 25), and is terrible to the kings of the earth, Ps.
lxxvi. 12. The thing does indeed look barbarous, thus to insult over men in misery, who had
suddenly fallen from the highest pitch of honour into this disgrace. It was hard for crowned
heads to be thus trodden upon, not by Joshua himself (that might better have been borne),
at least not by him only, but by all the captains of the army. Certainly it ought not to be
drawn into a precedent, for the case was extraordinary, and we have reason to think it was
by divine direction and impulse that Joshua did this. (1.) God would hereby punish the ab-
ominable wickedness of these kings, the measure of whose iniquity was now full. And, by
this public act of justice done upon these ringleaders of the Canaanites in sin, he would
possess his people with the greater dread and detestation of those sins of the nations that
God cast out from before them, which they would be tempted to imitate. (2.) He would hereby
have the promise by Moses made good (Deut. xxxiii. 29), Thou shalt tread upon their high
places, that is, their great men, which should the rather be speedily fulfilled in the letter be-
cause they are the very last words of Moses that we find upon record. (3.) He would hereby
encourage the faith and hope of his people Israel in reference to the wars that were yet before
them. Therefore Joshua said (v. 25): Fear not, nor be dismayed. [1.] "Fear not these kings,
nor any of theirs, as if there were any danger of having this affront now put upon them in
after-time revenged upon yourselves, a consideration which keeps many from being insolent
towards those they have at their mercy, because they know not how soon the uncertain fate
of war may turn the same wheel upon themselves; but you need not fear that any should
rise up ever to revenge this quarrel." [2.] "Fear not any other kings, who may at any time be
in confederacy against you, for you see these brought down, whom you thought formidable.
115
Chapter X
Thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies; now that they begin to fall, to fall so low that you
may set your feet on their necks, you may be confident that they shall not prevail, but shall
surely fall before you," Esth. vi. 13. (4.) He would hereby give a type and figure of Christ's
victories over the powers of darkness, and believers' victories through him. All the enemies
of the Redeemer shall be made his footstool, Ps. cx. 1. And see Ps. xviii. 40. The kings of the
earth set themselves against him (Ps. ii. 2), but sooner or later we shall see all things put under
Him (Heb. ii. 8), and principalities and powers made a show of, Col. ii. 15. And in these tri-
umphs we are more than conquerors, may tread upon the lion and adder (Ps. xci. 13), may
ride on the high places of the earth (Isa. lviii. 14), and may be confident that the God of peace
shall tread Satan under our feet, shall do it shortly and do it effectually, Rom. xvi. 20. See
Ps. cxlix. 8, 9.
3. How they were put to death. Perhaps, when they had undergone that terrible morti-
fication of being trodden upon by the captains of Israel, they were ready to say, as Agag,
Surely the bitterness of death is past, and that sufficient unto them was this punishment which
was inflicted by many; but their honours cannot excuse their lives, their forfeited devoted
lives. Joshua smote them with the sword, and then hanged up their bodies till evening, when
they were taken down, and thrown into the cave in which they had hidden themselves, v. 26,
27. That which they thought would have been their shelter was made their prison first and
then their grave; so shall we be disappointed in that which we flee to from God: yet to good
people the grave is still a hiding-place, Job xiv. 13. If these five kings had humbled themselves
in time, and had begged peace instead of waging war, they might have saved their lives; but
now the decree had gone forth, and they found no place for repentance, or the reversal of
the judgment; it was too late to expect it, though perhaps they sought it carefully with tears.
Seven Kings Defeated and Slain. (b. c. 1450.)
28 And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all the souls that were therein; he let none
remain: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.   29 Then
Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against
Libnah:   30 And the Lord delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and
he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain
in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho.   31 And Joshua passed
from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought
against it:   32 And the Lord delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the
second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein, ac-
cording to all that he had done to Libnah.   33 Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help
Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.   34
And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him; and they encamped
against it, and fought against it:   35 And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge
116
Chapter X
of the sword, and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to
all that he had done to Lachish.   36 And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with
him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it:   37 And they took it, and smote it with the
edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that were
therein; he left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed
it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.   38 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with
him, to Debir; and fought against it:   39 And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the
cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the
souls that were therein; he left none remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir,
and to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king.   40 So Joshua smote
all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their
kings: he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the Lord God of
Israel commanded.   41 And Joshua smote them from Kadesh-barnea even unto Gaza, and
all the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.   42 And all these kings and their land did
Joshua take at one time, because the Lord God of Israel fought for Israel.   43 And Joshua
returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.
We are here informed how Joshua improved the late glorious victory he had obtained
and the advantages he had gained by it, and to do this well is a general's praise.
I. Here is a particular account of the several cities which he immediately made himself
master of. 1. The cities of three of the kings whom he had conquered in the field he went
and took possession of, Lachish (v. 31, 32), Eglon (v. 34, 35), and Hebron, v. 36, 37. The
other two, Jerusalem and Jarmuth, were not taken at this time; perhaps his forces were either
so much fatigued with what they had done or so well content with what they had got that
they had no mind to attack those places, and so they let slip the fairest opportunity they
could ever expect of reducing them with ease, which afterwards was not done without diffi-
culty, Judg. i. 8; 2 Sam. v. 6. 2. Three other cities, and royal cities too, he took: Makkedah,
into the neighbourhood of which the five kings had fled, which brought Joshua and his
forces thither in pursuit of them, and so hastened its ruin (v. 28), Libnah (v. 29, 30), and
Debir, v. 38, 39. 3. One king that brought in his forces for the relief of Lachish, that had lost
its king, proved to meddle to his own hurt; it was Horam king of Gezer, who, either in
friendship to his neighbours or for his own security, offered to stop the progress of Joshua's
arms, and was cut off with all his forces, v. 33. Thus wicked men are often snared in their
counsels, and, by opposing God in the way of his judgments, bring them the sooner on their
own heads.
II. A general account of the country which was hereby reduced and brought into Israel's
hands (v. 40-42), that part of the land of Canaan of which they first got possession, which
lay south of Jerusalem, and afterwards fell, for the most part, to the lot of the tribe of Judah.
Observe in this narrative,
117
