Chapter XIII
war, and not think of putting off the harness so long as there remained any land to be pos-
sessed. Nor must we lay aside our spiritual armour, nor be off our watch, till our victory be
completed in the kingdom of glory.
III. He promises that he would make the Israelites masters of all those countries that
were yet unsubdued, though Joshua was old and not able to do it, old and not likely to live
to see it done. Whatever becomes of us, and however we may be laid aside as despised broken
vessels, God will do his own work in his own time (v. 6): I will drive them out. The original
is emphatic: "It is I that will do it, I that can do it when thou are dead and gone, and will do
it if Israel be not wanting to themselves." "I will do it by my Word," so the Chaldee here, as
in many other places, "by the eternal Word, the captain of the hosts of the Lord." This
promise that he would drive them out from before the children of Israel plainly supposes
it as the condition of the promise that the children of Israel must themselves attempt their
extirpation, must go up against them, else they could not be said to be driven out before
them; if afterwards Israel, through sloth, or cowardice, or affection to these idolaters, sit still
and let them alone, they must blame themselves, and not God, if they be not driven out. We
must work out our salvation, and then God will work in us and work with us; we must resist
our spiritual enemies, and then God will tread them under our feet; we must go forth to our
Christian work and warfare, and then God will go forth before us.
7 Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half
tribe of Manasseh,   8 With whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their inher-
itance, which Moses gave them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the
Lord gave them;   9 From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that
is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of Medeba unto Dibon;   10 And all the cities
of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children
of Ammon;   11 And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites, and all
mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah;   12 All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which
reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did
Moses smite, and cast them out.   13 Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the
Geshurites, nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell among
the Israelites until this day.   14 Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave none inheritance; the
sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel made by fire are their inheritance, as he said unto them.
  15 And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben inheritance according to their
families.   16 And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river Arnon, and
the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain by Medeba;   17 Heshbon, and all
her cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon,   18 And Jahazah,
and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,   19 And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zarethshahar in the
mount of the valley,   20 And Bethpeor, and Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth,   21 And
all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned
132
Chapter XIII
in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and
Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the country.   22 Balaam also the son
of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among them that were
slain by them.   23 And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the border
thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities and
the villages thereof.   24 And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the
children of Gad according to their families.   25 And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities
of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before Rabbah;  
26 And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the
border of Debir;   27 And in the valley, Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon,
the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the
edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.   28 This is the inheritance
of the children of Gad after their families, the cities, and their villages.   29 And Moses gave
inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and this was the possession of the half tribe of
the children of Manasseh by their families.   30 And their coast was from Mahanaim, all
Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan,
threescore cities:   31 And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of
Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the
one half of the children of Machir by their families.   32 These are the countries which Moses
did distribute for inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by Jericho,
eastward.   33 But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the Lord God of
Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.
Here we have, I. Orders given to Joshua to assign to each tribe its portion of this land,
including that which was yet unsubdued, which must be brought into the lot, in a believing
confidence that it should be conquered when Israel was multiplied so as to have occasion
for it (v. 7): Now divide this land. Joshua thought all must be conquered before any must be
divided. "No," said, God, "there is as much conquered as will serve your turn for the present;
divide this, and make your best of it, and wait for the remainder hereafter." Note, We must
take the comfort of what we have, though we cannot compass all we would have. Observe,
1. The land must be divided among the several tribes, and they must not always live in
common, as now they did. Which way soever a just property is acquired, it is the will of that
God who has given the earth to the children of men that there should be such a thing, and
that every man should know his own, and not invade that which is another's. The world
must be governed, not by force, but right, by the law of equity, not of arms.
2. That it must be divided for an inheritance, though they got it by conquest. (1.) The
promise of it came to them as an inheritance from their fathers; the land of promise pertained
to the children of promise, who were thus beloved for their fathers' sakes, and in performance
of the covenant with them. (2.) The possession of it was to be transmitted by them, as an
133
Chapter XIII
inheritance to their children. Frequently, what is got by force is soon lost again; but Israel,
having an incontestable title to this land by the divine grant, might see it hereby secured as
an inheritance to their seed after them, and that God kept this mercy for thousands.
3. That Joshua must not divide it by his own will. Though he was a very wise, just, and
good man, it must not be left to him to give what he pleased to each tribe; but he must do
it by lot, which referred the matter wholly to God, and to his determination, for he it is that
appoints the bounds of our habitation, and every man's judgment must proceed from him.
But Joshua must preside in this affair, must manage this solemn appeal to Providence, and
see that the lot was drawn fairly and without fraud, and that every tribe did acquiesce in it.
The lot indeed causeth contention to cease, Prov. xviii. 18. But, if upon this lot any controversy
should arise, Joshua by his wisdom and authority must determine it, and prevent any ill
consequences of it. Joshua must have the honour of dividing the land, (1.) Because he had
undergone the fatigue of conquering it: and when, through his hand, each tribe received its
allotment, they would thereby be made the more sensible of their obligations to him. And
what a pleasure must it needs be to a man of such a public spirit as Joshua was to see the
people that were so dear to him eating of the labour of his hands! (2.) That he might be
herein a type of Christ, who has not only conquered for us the gates of hell, but has opened
to us the gates of heaven, and, having purchased the eternal inheritance for all believers,
will in due time put them all in possession of it.
II. An account is here given of the distribution of the land on the other side Jordan
among the Reubenites, and Gadites, and half the tribe of Manasseh. Observe,
1. How this account is introduced. It comes in, (1.) As the reason why this land within
Jordan must be divided only to the nine tribes and a half, because the other two and a half
were already provided for. (2.) As a pattern to Joshua in the work he had now to do. He had
seen Moses distribute that land, which would give him some aid in distributing this, and
thence he might take his measure; only this was to be done by lot, but it should seem Moses
did that himself, according to the wisdom given unto him. (3.) As an inducement to Joshua
to hasten the dividing of this land, that the nine tribes and a half might not be kept any
longer than was necessary out of their possession, since their brethren of the two tribes and
a half were so well settled in theirs; and God their common Father would not have such a
difference made between his children.
2. The particulars of this account.
(1.) Here is a general description of the country that was given to the two tribes and a
half, which Moses gave them, even as Moses gave them, v. 8. The repetition implies a ratific-
ation of the grant by Joshua. Moses settled this matter, and, as Moses settled it, so shall it
rest; Joshua will not, under any pretence whatsoever, go about to alter it. And a reason is
intimated why he would not, because Moses was the servant of the Lord, and acted in this
matter by secret direction from him and was faithful as a servant. Here we have, [1.] The
134
Chapter XIII
fixing of the boundaries of this country, by which they were divided from the neighbouring
nations, v. 9, &c. Israel must know their own and keep to it, and may not, under pretence
of their being God's peculiar people, encroach upon their neighbours, and invade their rights
and properties, to which they had a good and firm title by providence, though not, as Israel,
a title by promise. [2.] An exception of one part of this country from Israel's possession,
though it was in their grant, namely, the Geshurites and the Maachathites, v. 13. They had
not leisure to reduce all the remote and obscure corners of the country in Moses's time, and
afterwards they had no mind to it, being easy with what they had. Thus those who are not
straitened in God's promises are yet straitened in their own faith, and prayers, and endeav-
ours.
(2.) A very particular account of the inheritances of these two tribes and a half, how
they were separated from each other, and what cites, with the towns, villages, and fields,
commonly known and reputed to be appurtenances to them, belonged to each tribe. This
is very fully and exactly set down in order that posterity might, in reading this history, be
the more affected with the goodness of God to their ancestors, when they found what a large
and fruitful country, and what abundance of great and famous cities, he put them in posses-
sion of (God's grants look best when we descend to the particulars); and also that the limits
of every tribe being punctually set down in this authentic record disputes might be prevented,
and such contests between the tribes as commonly happen where boundaries have not been
adjusted nor this matter brought to a certainty. And we have reason to think that the register
here prescribed and published of the lot of each tribe was of great use to Israel in after-ages,
was often appealed to, and always acquiesced in, for the determining of meum and
tuum—mine and thine.
[1.] We have here the lot of the tribe of Reuben, Jacob's first-born, who, though he had
lost the dignity and power which pertained to the birthright, yet, it seems, had the advantage
of being first served. Perhaps those of that tribe had an eye to this in desiring to be seated
on that side Jordan, that, since they could not expect the benefit of the best lot, they might
have the credit of the first. Observe, First, In the account of the lot of this tribe mention is
made of the slaughter, 1. Of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who reigned in this country, and
might have kept it and his life if he would have been neighbourly, and have suffered Israel
to pass through his territories, but, by attempting to oppose them, justly brought ruin upon
himself, Num. xxi. 21, &c. 2. Of the princes of Midian, who were slain afterwards in another
war (Num. xxxi. 8), and yet are here called dukes of Sihon, and are said to be smitten with
him, because they were either tributaries to him, or, in his opposition to Israel, confederates
with him, and hearty in his interests, and his fall made way for theirs not long after. 3. Of
Balaam particularly, that would, if he could, have cursed Israel, and was soon after recom-
pensed according to the wickedness of his endeavour (Ps. xxviii. 4), for he fell with those that
set him on. This was recorded before (Num. xxxi. 8), and is here repeated, because the de-
135
Chapter XIII
feating of Balaam's purpose to curse Israel was the turning of that curse into a blessing, and
was such an instance of the power and goodness of God as was fit to be had in everlasting
remembrance. See Mic. vi. 5. Secondly, Within the lot of this tribe was that Mount Pisgah
from the top of which Moses took his view of the earthly Canaan and his flight to the
heavenly. And not far off thence Elijah was when he was fetched up to heaven in a chariot
of fire. The separation of this tribe from the rest, by the river Jordan, was that which Deborah
lamented; and the preference they gave to their private interests above the public was what
she censured, Judg. v. 15, 16. In this tribe lay Heshbon and Sibmah, famed for their fruitful
fields and vineyards. See Isa. xvi. 8, 9; Jer. xlvii. 32. This tribe, with that of Gad, was sorely
shaken by Hazael king of Syria (2 Kings x. 33), and afterwards dislodged and carried into
captivity, twenty years before the general captivity of the ten tribes by the king of Assyria,
1 Chron. v. 26.
[2.] The lot of the tribe of Gad, v. 24-28. This lay north of Reuben's lot; the country of
Gilead lay in this tribe, so famous for its balm that it is thought strange indeed if there be
no balm in Gilead, and the cities of Jabesh-Gilead and Ramoth-Gilead which we often read
of in scripture. Succoth and Penuel, which we read of in the story of Gideon, were in this
tribe; and that forest which is called the wood of Ephraim (from the slaughter Jephthah made
there of the Ephraimites), in which Absalom's rebellious army was beaten, while his father
David lay at Mahanaim, one of the frontier-cities of this tribe, v. 26. Sharon, famous for
roses, was in this tribe. And within the limits of this tribe lived those Gadarenes that loved
their swine better than their Saviour, fitter to be called Girgashites than Israelites.
[3.] The lot of the half-tribe of Manasseh, v. 29-31. Bashan, the kingdom of Og, was in
this allotment, famous for the best timber, witness the oaks of Bashan—and the best breed
of cattle, witness the bulls and rams of Bashan. This tribe lay north of Gad, reached to Mount
Hermon, and had in it part of Gilead. Mispeh was in this half-tribe, and Jephthah was one
of its ornaments; so was Elijah, for in this tribe was Thisbe, whence he is called the Tishbite;
and Jair was another. In the edge of the tribe stood Chorazin, honoured with Christ's won-
drous works, but ruined by his righteous woe for not improving them.
[4.] Twice in this chapter it is taken notice of that to the tribe of Levi Moses gave no in-
heritance (v. 14, 33), for so God had appointed, Num. xviii. 20. If they had been appointed
to a lot entire by themselves, Moses would have served them first, not because it was his
own tribe, but because it was God's; but they must be provided for in another manner; their
habitations must be scattered in all the tribes, and their maintenance brought out of all the
tribes, and God himself was the portion both of their inheritance and of their cup, Deut. x.
9; xviii. 2.
136
Chapter XIV
Chapter XIV
J O S H U A
CHAP. XIV.
Here is, I. The general method that was taken in dividing the land, ver. 1-5. II. The de-
mand Caleb made of Hebron, as his by promise, and therefore not to be put into the lot
with the rest, ver. 6-12. And Joshua's grant of that demand, ver. 13-15. This was done at
Gilgal, which was as yet their head-quarters.
The Distribution of Canaan. (b. c. 1444.)
1 And these are the countries which the children of Israel inherited in the land of Canaan,
which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the
tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.   2 By lot was their inher-
itance, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half
tribe.   3 For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and a half tribe on the other side
Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance among them.   4 For the children of
Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no part unto the Levites
in the land, save cities to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their substance.
  5 As the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they divided the land.
The historian, having in the foregoing chapter given an account of the disposal of the
countries on the other side Jordan, now comes to tell us what they did with the countries
in the land of Canaan. They were not conquered to be left desert, a habitation for dragons,
and a court for owls, Isa. xxxiv. 13. No, the Israelites that had hitherto been closely encamped
in a body, and the greatest part of them such as never knew any other way of living, must
now disperse themselves to replenish these new conquests. It is said of the earth, God created
it not in vain; he formed it to be inhabited, Isa. xlv. 18. Canaan would have been subdued in
vain if it had not been inhabited. Yet every man might not go and settle where he pleased,
but as there seems to have been in the days of Peleg an orderly and regular division of the
habitable earth among the sons of Noah (Gen. x. 25, 32), so there was now such a division
of the land of Canaan among the sons of Jacob. God had given Moses directions how this
distribution should be made, and those directions are here punctually observed. See Num.
xxvi. 53, &c.
I. The managers of this great affair were Joshua the chief magistrate, Eleazar the chief
priest, and ten princes, one of each of the tribes that were now to have their inheritance,
whom God himself had nominated (Num. xxxiv. 17, &c.) some years before; and, it should
seem, they were all now in being, and attended this service, that every tribe, having a repres-
entative of its own, might be satisfied that there was fair dealing, and might the more con-
tentedly sit down by its lot.
II. The tribes among whom this dividend was to be made were nine and a half. 1. Not
the two and a half that were already seated (v. 3), though perhaps now that they saw what
137
Chapter XIV
a good land Canaan was, and how effectually it was subdued, they might some of them repent
their choice, and wish they had now been to have their lot with their brethren, upon which
condition they would gladly have given up what they had on the other side Jordan; but it
could not be admitted: they had made their election without power of revocation, and so
must their doom be; they themselves have decided it, and they must adhere to their choice.
2. Not the tribe of Levi; this was to be otherwise provided for. God had distinguished them
from, and dignified them above, the other tribes, and they must not now mingle themselves
with them, nor cast in their lot among them, for this would entangle them in the affairs of
this life, which would not consist with a due attendance on their sacred function. But, 3.
Joseph made two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim, pursuant to Jacob's adoption of Joseph's
two sons, and so the number of the tribes was kept up to twelve, though Levi was taken out,
which is intimated here (v. 4): The children of Joseph were two tribes, therefore they gave no
part to Levi, they being twelve without them.
III. The rule by which they went was the lot, v. 2. The disposal of that is of the Lord, Prov.
xvi. 33. It was here used in an affair of weight, and which could not otherwise be accommod-
ated to universal satisfaction, and it was used in a solemn religious manner as an appeal to
God, by consent of parties. In dividing by lot, 1. They referred themselves to God, and to
his wisdom and sovereignty, believing him fitter to determine for them than they for
themselves. Ps. xlvii. 4, He shall choose our inheritance for us. 2. They professed a willingness
to abide by the determination of it; for every man must take what is his lot, and make the
best of it. In allusion to this we are said to obtain an inheritance in Christ (Eph. i. 11),
eklerothemen—we have obtained it by lot, so the word signified; for it is obtained by a divine
designation. Christ, our Joshua, gives eternal life to as many as were given him, John xvii.
2.
Caleb's Request. (b. c. 1444.)
6 Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the son of Jephunneh
the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the thing that the Lord said unto Moses the man
of God concerning me and thee in Kadeshbarnea.   7 Forty years old was I when Moses the
servant of the Lord sent me from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and I brought him
word again as it was in mine heart.   8 Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made
the heart of the people melt: but I wholly followed the Lord my God.   9 And Moses sware
on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance,
and thy children's for ever, because thou hast wholly followed the Lord my God.   10 And
now, behold, the Lord hath kept me alive, as he said, these forty and five years, even since
the Lord spake this word unto Moses, while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness:
and now, lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old.   11 As yet I am as strong this day
as I was in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now,
for war, both to go out, and to come in.   12 Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof
138
Chapter XIV
the Lord spake in that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there, and
that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the Lord will be with me, then I shall be able
to drive them out, as the Lord said.   13 And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the
son of Jephunneh Hebron for an inheritance.   14 Hebron therefore became the inheritance
of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed
the Lord God of Israel.   15 And the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba; which Arba
was a great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war.
Before the lot was cast into the lap for the determining of the portions of the respective
tribes, the particular portion of Caleb was assigned to him. He was now, except Joshua, not
only the oldest man in all Israel, but was twenty years older than any of them, for all that
were above twenty years old when he was forty were dead in the wilderness; it was fit
therefore that this phoenix of his age should have some particular marks of honour put
upon him in the dividing of the land. Now,
I. Caleb here presents his petition, or rather makes his demand, to have Hebron given
him for a possession (this mountain he calls it, v. 12), and not to have that put into the lot
with the other parts of the country. To justify his demand, he shows that God had long since,
by Moses, promised him that very mountain; so that God's mind being already made known
in this matter it would be a vain and needless thing to consult it any further by casting lots,
by which we are to appeal to God in those cases only which cannot otherwise be decided,
not in those which, like this, are already determined. Caleb is here called the Kenezite, some
think from some remarkable victory obtained by him over the Kenezites, as the Romans
gave their great generals titles from the countries they conquered, as Africanus, Germanicus,
&c. Observe,
1. To enforce his petition, (1.) He brings the children of Judah, that is, the heads and
great men of that tribe, along with him, to present it, who were willing thus to pay their re-
spects to that ornament of their tribe, and to testify their consent that he should be provided
for by himself, and that they would not take it as any reflection upon the rest of this tribe.
Caleb was the person whom God had chosen out of that tribe to be employed in dividing
the land (Num. xxxiv. 19), and therefore, lest he should seem to improve his authority as a
commissioner for his own private advantage and satisfaction, he brings his brethren along
with him, and waiving his own power, seems rather to rely upon their interest. (2.) He appeals
to Joshua himself concerning the truth of the allegations upon which he grounded his peti-
tion: Thou knowest the thing, v. 6. (3.) He makes a very honourable mention of Moses, which
he knew would not be at all unpleasing to Joshua: Moses the man of God (v. 6), and the
servant of the Lord, v. 7. What Moses said he took as from God himself, because Moses was
his mouth and his agent, and therefore he had reason both to desire and expect that it should
be made good. What can be more earnestly desired than the tokens of God's favour? And
what more confidently expected than the grants of his promise?
139
