Chapter XVIII
they could guess at their true value, which they must have an eye to, and not merely to the
number of the cities and extent of the country. Judah is fixed on the south and Joseph on
the north of Shiloh, to protect the tabernacle (v. 5), and therefore they need not describe
their country, but those countries only that were yet undisposed of. He gives a reason (v. 7)
why they must divide it into seven parts only, because the Levites were to have no temporal
estate (as we say), but their benefices only, which were entailed upon their families: The
priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance, and a very honourable, comfortable, plentiful in-
heritance it was. Gad and Reuben, with half of the tribe of Manasseh, were already fixed,
and needed not to have any further care taken of them. Now, (1.) The surveyors were three
men out of each of the seven tribes that were to be provided for (v. 4), one-and-twenty in
all, who perhaps for greater expedition, because they had already lost time, divided themselves
into three companies, one of each tribe in each company, and took each their district to
survey. The matter was thus referred equally, that there might be neither any partiality used
in making up the seven lots, nor any shadow of suspicion given, but all might be satisfied
that they had right done them. (2.) The survey was accordingly made, and brought in to
Joshua, v. 8, 9. Josephus says it was seven months in the doing. And we must in it observe,
[1.] The faith and courage of the persons employed: abundance of Canaanites remained in
the land, and all raging against Israel, as a bear robbed of her whelps; the business of these
surveyors would soon be known, and what could they expect but to be way-laid, and have
their brains knocked out by the fierce observers? But in obedience to Joshua's command,
and in dependence upon God's power, they thus put their lives in their hands to serve their
country. [2.] The good providence of God in protecting them from the many deaths they
were exposed to, and bringing them all safely again to the host at Shiloh. When we are in
the way of our duty we are under the special protection of the Almighty.
2. When it was surveyed, and reduced to seven lots, then Joshua would, by appeal to
God, and direction from him, determine which of these lots should belong to each tribe (v.
6): That I may cast lots for you here at the tabernacle (because it was a sacred transaction)
before the Lord our God, to whom each tribe must have an eye, with thankfulness for the
conveniences and submission to the inconveniences of their allotment. What we have in
the world we must acknowledge God's property in, and dispose of it as before him, with
justice, and charity, and dependence upon Providence. The heavenly Canaan is described
to us in a book, the book of the scriptures, and there are in it mansions and portions sufficient
for all God's spiritual Israel. Christ is our Joshua that divides it to us. On him we must attend,
and to him we must apply for an inheritance with the saints in light. See John xvii. 2, 3.
The Lot of Benjamin. (b. c. 1444.)
  11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their
families: and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children
of Joseph.   12 And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border went up
162
Chapter XVIII
to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and
the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Beth-aven.   13 And the border went over
from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is Beth-el, southward; and the border
descended to Ataroth-adar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Beth-
horon.   14 And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea southward,
from the hill that lieth before Beth-horon southward; and the goings out thereof were at
Kirjath-baal, which is Kirjath-jearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west quarter.
  15 And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjath-jearim, and the border went out on
the west, and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah:   16 And the border came down
to the end of the mountain that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is
in the valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of Hinnom, to the side
of Jebusi on the south, and descended to En-rogel,   17 And was drawn from the north, and
went forth to En-shemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going
up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,   18 And passed
along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and went down unto Arabah:   19
And the border passed along to the side of Beth-hoglah northward: and the outgoings of
the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the south
coast.   20 And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the
children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.   21
Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were
Jericho, and Beth-hoglah, and the valley of Keziz,   22 And Beth-arabah, and Zemaraim,
and Beth-el,   23 And Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah,   24 And Chephar-haammonai, and
Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:   25 Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,  
26 And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,   27 And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,   28
And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with
their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.
We have here the lot of the tribe of Benjamin, which Providence cast next to Joseph on
the one hand, because Benjamin was own and only brother to Joseph, and was little Benjamin
(Ps. lxviii. 27), that needed the protection of great Joseph, and yet had a better protector,
for the Lord shall cover him all the day long, Deut. xxxiii. 12. And it was next to Judah on
the other hand, that this tribe might hereafter unite with Judah in an adherence to the throne
of David and the temple at Jerusalem. Here we have, 1. The exact borders and limits of this
tribe, which we need not be exact in the explication of. As it had Judah on the south and
Joseph on the north, so it had Jordan on the east and Dan on the west. The western border
is said to compass the corner of the sea southward (v. 14), whereas no part of the lot of this
tribe came near to the great sea. Bishop Patrick thinks the meaning is that it ran along in a
parallel line to the great sea, though at a distance. Dr. Fuller suggests that since it is not
called the great sea, but only the sea, which often signifies any lake or mere, it may be meant
163
Chapter XVIII
of the pool of Gibeon, which may be called a corner or canton of the sea; it is called the great
waters of Gibeon (Jer. xli. 12), and it is compassed by the western border of this tribe. 2. The
particular cities in this tribe, not all, but the most considerable. Twenty-six are here named.
Jericho is put first, though dismantled, and forbidden to be rebuilt as a city with gates and
walls, because it might be built and inhabited as a country village, and so was not useless to
this tribe. Gilgal, where Israel first encamped when Saul was made king (1 Sam. xi. 15), was
in this tribe. It was afterwards a very profane place. Hos. ix. 15, All their wickedness is in
Gilgal. Beth-el was in this tribe, a famous place. Though Benjamin adhered to the house of
David, yet Beth-el, it seems, was in the possession of the house of Joseph (Judg. i. 23-25),
and there Jeroboam set up one of his calves. In this tribe was Gibeon, where the altar was
in the beginning of Solomon's time, 2 Chron. i. 3. Gibeah likewise, that infamous place
where the Levite's concubine was abused. Mizpeh, and near it Samuel's Ebenezer, and also
Anathoth, Jeremiah's city, were in this tribe, as was the northern part of Jerusalem. Paul was
the honour of this tribe (Rom. xi. 1; Phil. iii. 5); but where his land lay we know not: he
sought the better country.
164
Chapter XIX
Chapter XIX
J O S H U A
CHAP. XIX.
In the description of the lots of Judah and Benjamin we have an account both of the
borders that surrounded them and of the cities contained in them. In that of Ephraim and
Manasseh we have the borders, but not the cities; in this chapter Simeon and Dan are de-
scribed by their cities only, and not their borders, because they lay very much within Judah,
especially the former; the rest have both their borders described and their cities names, es-
pecially frontiers. Here is, I. The lot of Simeon, ver. 1-9. II. Of Zebulun, ver. 10-16. III. Of
Issachar, ver. 17-23. IV. Of Asher, ver. 24-31. V. Of Naphtali, ver. 32-39. VI. Of Dan, ver.
40-48. Lastly, The inheritance assigned to Joshua himself and his own family, ver. 49-51.
The Lot of Simeon. (b. c. 1444.)
1 And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of Simeon
according to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children
of Judah.   2 And they had in their inheritance Beer-sheba, or Sheba, and Moladah,   3 And
Hazar-shual, and Balah, and Azem,   4 And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,   5 And Ziklag,
and Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susah,   6 And Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities
and their villages:   7 Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:   8
And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalath-beer, Ramath of the south.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.   9
Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon:
for the part of the children of Judah was too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon
had their inheritance within the inheritance of them.
Simeon's lot was drawn after Judah's, Joseph's, and Benjamin's, because Jacob had put
that tribe under disgrace; yet it is put before the two younger sons of Leah and the three
sons of the handmaids. Not one person of note, neither judge nor prophet, was of this tribe,
that we know of.
I. The situation of their lot was within that of Judah (v. 1) and was taken from it, v. 9.
It seems, those that first surveyed the land thought it larger than it was, and that it would
have held out to give every tribe in proportion as large a share as they had carved out for
Judah; but, upon a more strict enquiry, it was found that it would not reach (v. 9): The part
of the children of Judah was too much for them, more than they needed, and more, as it
proved, than fell to their share. Yet God did not by the lot lessen it, but left it to their prudence
and care afterwards to discover and rectify the mistake, which when they did, 1. The men
of Judah did not oppose the taking away of the cities again, which by the first distribution
fell within their border, when they were convinced that they had more than their proportion.
In all such cases errors must be excepted and a review admitted if there be occasion. Though,
in strictness, what fell to their lot was their right against all the world, yet they would not
165
Chapter XIX
insist upon it when it appeared that another tribe would want what they had to spare. Note,
We must look on the things of others, and not on our own only. The abundance of some
must supply the wants of others, that there may be somewhat of an equality, for which there
may be equity where there is not law. 2. That which was thus taken off from Judah to be put
into a new lot Providence directed to the tribe of Simeon, that Jacob's prophecy concerning
this tribe might be fulfilled, I will divide them in Jacob. The cities of Simeon were scattered
in Judah, with which tribe they were surrounded, except on that side towards the sea. This
brought them into a confederacy with the tribe of Judah (Judg. i. 3), and afterwards was a
happy occasion of the adherence of many of this tribe to the house of David, at the time of
the revolt of the ten tribes to Jeroboam. 2 Chron. xv. 9, out of Simeon they fell to Asa in
abundance. It is good being in a good neighbourhood.
II. The cities within their lot are here named. Beersheba, or Sheba, for these names seem
to refer to the same place, is put first. Ziklag, which we read of in David's story, is one of
them. What course they took to enlarge their borders and make room for themselves we
find 1 Chron. iv. 39, &c.
The Lot of Zebulun. (b. c. 1444.)
10 And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families:
and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:   11 And their border went up toward
the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before
Jokneam;   12 And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of
Chisloth-tabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia,   13 And from
thence passeth on along on the east to Gittah-hepher, to Ittah-kazin, and goeth out to
Remmon-methoar to Neah;   14 And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hanna-
thon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthah-el:   15 And Kattath, and Na-
hallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Beth-lehem: twelve cities with their villages.   16 This
is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with
their villages.
This is the lot of Zebulun, who, though born of Leah after Issachar, yet was blessed by
Jacob and Moses before him; and therefore it was so ordered that his lot was drawn before
that of Issachar, north of which it lay and south of Asher. 1. The lot of this tribe was washed
by the great sea on the west, and by the sea of Tiberias on the east, answering Jacob's
prophecy (Gen. xlix. 13), Zebulun shall be a haven of ships, trading ships on the great sea
and fishing ships on the sea of Galilee. 2. Though there were some places in this tribe which
were made famous in the Old Testament, especially Mount Carmel, on which the famous
trial was between God and Baal in Elijah's time, yet it was made much more illustrious in
the New Testament; for within the lot of this tribe was Nazareth, where our blessed Saviour
spent so much of his time on earth, and from which he was called Jesus of Nazareth, and
166
Chapter XIX
Mount Tabor on which he was transfigured, and that coast of the sea of Galilee on which
Christ preached so many sermons and wrought so many miracles.
The Lot of Issachar. (b. c. 1444.)
17 And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of Issachar according to
their families.   18 And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,   19
And Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath,   20 And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,   21
And Remeth, and En-gannim, and En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez;   22 And the coast reacheth
to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Beth-shemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at
Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.   23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages.
The lot of Issachar ran from Jordan in the east to the great sea in the west, Manasseh
on the south, and Zebulun on the north. A numerous tribe, Num. xxvi. 25. Tola, one of the
judges, was of this tribe, Judg. x. 1. So was Baasha, one of the kings of Israel, 1 Kings xv. 27.
The most considerable places in this tribe were, 1. Jezreel, in which was Ahab's palace, and
near it Naboth's vineyard. 2. Shunem, where lived that good Shunamite that entertained
Elisha. 3. The river Kishon, on the banks of which, in this tribe, Sisera was beaten by Deborah
and Barak. 4. The mountains of Gilboa, on which Saul and Jonathan were slain, which were
not far from Endor, where Saul consulted the witch. 5. The valley of Megiddo, where Josiah
was slain near Hadad-rimmon, 2 Kings xxiii. 29; Zech. xii. 11.
The Lot of Asher. (b. c. 1444.)
24 And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their
families.   25 And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,   26 And
Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihor-
libnath;   27 And turneth toward the sunrising to Beth-dagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and
to the valley of Jiphthah-el toward the north side of Beth-emek, and Neiel, and goeth out
to Cabul on the left hand,   28 And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even
unto great Zidon;   29 And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre;
and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to
Achzib:   30 Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.
  31 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families,
these cities with their villages.
The lot of Asher lay upon the coast of the great sea. We read not of any famous person
of this tribe but Anna the prophetess, who was a constant resident in the temple at the time
of our Saviour's birth, Luke ii. 36. Nor were there many famous places in this tribe. Aphek
(mentioned v. 30) was the place near which Benhadad was beaten by Ahad, 1 Kings xx. 30.
But close adjoining to this tribe were the celebrated sea-port towns of Tyre and Sidon, which
we read so much of. Tyre is called here that strong city (v. 29), but Bishop Patrick thinks it
167
Chapter XIX
was not the same Tyre that we read of afterwards, for that was built on an island; this old
strong city was on the continent. And it is conjectured by some that into these two strong-
holds, Sidon and Tzor, or Tyre, many of the people of Canaan fled and took shelter when
Joshua invaded them.
The Lot of Naphtali. (b. c. 1444.)
32 The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali
according to their families.   33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim,
and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:  
34 And then the coast turneth westward to Aznoth-tabor, and goeth out from thence to
Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side,
and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.   35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer,
and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,   36 And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,   37
And Kedesh, and Edrei, and En-hazor,   38 And Iron, and Migdal-el, Horem, and Beth-
anath, and Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.   39 This is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the cities and their villages.
Naphtali lay furthest north of all the tribes, bordering on Mount Libanus. The city of
Leshem, or Liash, lay on the utmost edge of it to the north, and therefore when the Danites
had made themselves masters of it, and called it Dan, the length of Canaan from north to
south was reckoned from Dan to Beersheba. It had Zebulun on the south, Asher on the west,
and Judah upon Jordan, probably a city of that name, and so distinguished from the tribe
of Judah on the east. It was in the lot of this tribe, near the waters of Merom, that Joshua
fought and routed Jabin, ch. xi. 1. &c. In this tribe stood Capernaum and Bethsaida, on the
north end of the sea of Tiberias, in which Christ did so many mighty works; and the
mountain (as is supposed) on which Christ preached, Matt. v. 1.
The Lot of Dan. (b. c. 1444.)
40 And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their
families.   41 And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir-shemesh,  
42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,   43 And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,  
44 And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,   45 And Jehud, and Bene-berak, and Gath-
rimmon,   46 And Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.   47 And the coast
of the children of Dan went out too little for them: therefore the children of Dan went up
to fight against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed
it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.   48 This
is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these cities
with their villages.
Dan, though commander of one of the four squadrons of the camp of Israel, in the
wilderness, that which brought up the rear, yet was last provided for in Canaan, and his lot
168
