Chapter XV
said to be a part among the children of Judah; though it was assigned him before the lot of
that tribe came up, yet it proved, God so directing the lot, to be in the heart of that tribe,
which was graciously ordered in kindness to him, that he might not be as one separated
from his brethren and surrounded by those of other tribes.
II. Caleb having obtained this grant, we are told,
1. How he signalized his own valour in the conquest of Hebron (v. 14): He drove thence
the three sons of Anak, he and those that he engaged to assist him in this service. This is
mentioned here to show that the confidence he had expressed of success in this affair,
through the presence of God with him (ch. xiv. 12), did not deceive him, but the event
answered his expectation. It is not said that he slew these giants, but he drove them thence,
which intimates that they retired upon his approach and fled before him; the strength and
stature of their bodies could not keep up the courage of their minds, but with the counten-
ances of lions they had the hearts of trembling hares. Thus does God often cut off the spirit
of princes (Ps. lxxvi. 12), take away the heart of the chief of the people (Job xii. 24), and so
shame the confidence of the proud; and thus if we resist the devil, that roaring lion, though
he fall not, yet he will flee.
2. How he encouraged the valour of those about him in the conquest of Debir, v. 15,
&c. It seems, though Joshua had once made himself master of Debir (ch. x. 39), yet the
Canaanites had regained the possession in the absence of the army, so that the work had to
be done a second time; and when Caleb had completed the reduction of Hebron, which was
for himself and his own family, to show his zeal for the public good, as much as for his own
private interest, he pushes on his conquest to Debir, and will not lay down his arms till he
sees that city also effectually reduced, which lay but ten miles southward from Hebron,
though he had not any particular concern in it, but the reducing of it would be to the general
advantage of his tribe. Let us learn hence not to seek and mind our own things only, but to
concern and engage ourselves for the welfare of the community we are members of; we are
not born for ourselves, nor must we live to ourselves.
(1.) Notice is taken of the name of this city. It had been called Kirjath-sepher, the city of
a book, and Kirjath-sannah (v. 49), which some translate the city of learning (so the LXX.
Polis grammaton), whence some conjecture that it had been a university among the
Canaanites, like Athens in Greece, in which their youth were educated; or perhaps the books
of their chronicles or records, or the antiquities of the nation, were laid up there; and, it may
be, this was it that made Caleb so desirous to see Israel master of this city, that they might
get acquainted with the ancient learning of the Canaanites.
(2.) The proffer that Caleb made of his daughter, and a good portion with her, to any
one that would undertake to reduce that city, and to command the forces that should be
employed in that service, v. 16. Thus Saul promised a daughter to him that would kill Goliath
(1 Sam. xvii. 25), neither of them intending to force his daughter to marry such as she could
147
Chapter XV
not love, but both of them presuming upon their daughters' obedience, and submission to
their fathers' will, though it might be contrary to their own humour or inclination. Caleb's
family was not long honourable and wealthy, but religious; he that himself followed the Lord
fully no doubt taught his children to do so, and therefore it could not but be a desirable
match to any young gentleman. Caleb, in making the proposal, aims, [1.] To do service to
his country by the reducing of that important place; and, [2.] To marry a daughter well, to
a man of learning, that would have a particular affection for the city of books, and a man of
war, that would be likely to serve his country, and do worthily in his generation. Could he
but marry his child to a man of such a character, he would think her well bestowed, whether
the share in the lot of his tribe were more or less.
(3.) The place was bravely taken by Othniel, a nephew of Caleb, whom probably Caleb
had thoughts of when he made the proffer, v. 17. This Othniel, who thus signalized himself
when he was young, had long after, in his advanced years, the honour to be both a deliverer
and a judge in Israel, the first single person that presided in their affairs after Joshua's death.
It is good for those who are setting out in the world to begin betimes with that which is great
and good, that, excelling in service when they are young, they may excel in honour when
they grow old.
(4.) Hereupon (all parties being agreed) Othniel married his cousin-german Achsah,
Caleb's daughter. It is probable that he had a kindness for her before, which put him upon
this bold undertaking to obtain her. Love to his country, an ambition of honour, and a desire
to find favour with the princes of his people, might not have engaged him in this great action,
but his affection for Achsah did. This made it intolerable to him to think that any one should
do more to win her favour than he would, and so inspired him with this generous fire. Thus
is love strong as death, and jealousy cruel as the grave.
(5.) Because the historian is now upon the dividing of the land, he gives us an account
of Achsah's portion, which was in land, as more valuable because enjoyed by virtue of the
divine promise, though we may suppose the conquerors of Canaan, who had had the spoil
of so many rich cities, were full of money too. [1.] Some land she obtained by Caleb's free
grant, which was allowed while she married within her own tribe and family, as Zelophehad's
daughters did. He gave her a south land, v. 19. Land indeed, but a south land, dry, and apt
to be parched. [2.] She obtained more upon her request; she would have had her husband
to ask for a field, probably some particular field, or champaign ground, which belonged to
Caleb's lot, and joined to that south land which he had settled upon his daughter at marriage.
She thought her husband had the best interest in her father, who, no doubt, was extremely
pleased with his late glorious achievement, but he thought it was more proper for her to
ask, and she would be more likely to prevail; accordingly she did, submitting to her husband's
judgment, though contrary to her own; and she managed the undertaking with great address.
First, She took the opportunity when her father brought her home to the house of her hus-
148
Chapter XV
band, when the satisfaction of having disposed of his daughter so well would make him
think nothing too much to do for her. Secondly, She lighted off her ass, in token of respect
and reverence to her father, whom she would honour still, as much as before her marriage.
She cried or sighed from off her ass, so the LXX. and the vulgar Latin read it; she expressed
some grief and concern, that she might give her father occasion to ask her what she wanted.
Thirdly, She calls it a blessing, because it would add much to the comfort of her settlement;
and she was sure that, since she married not only with her father's consent, but in obedience
to his command, he would not deny her his blessing. Fourthly, She asks only for the water,
without which the ground she had would be of little use either for tillage or pasture, but she
means the field in which the springs of water were. The modesty and reasonableness of her
quest gave it a great advantage. Earth without water would be like a tree without sap, or the
body of an animal without blood; therefore, when God gathered the waters into one place,
he wisely and graciously left some in every place, that the earth might be enriched for the
service of man. See Ps. civ. 10, &c. Well, Achsah gained her point; her father gave her what
she asked, and perhaps more, for he gave her the upper springs and the nether springs, two
fields so called from the springs that were in them, as we commonly distinguish between
the higher field and the lower field. Those who understand it but of one field, watered both
with the rain of heaven and the springs that issued out of the bowels of the earth, give
countenance to the allusion we commonly make to this, when we pray for spiritual and
heavenly blessings which relate to our souls as blessings of the upper springs, and those
which relate to the body and the life that now is as blessings of the nether springs.
From this story we learn, 1. That it is no breach of the tenth commandment moderately
to desire those comforts and conveniences of this life which we see attainable in a fair and
regular way. 2. That husbands and wives should mutually advise, and jointly agree, about
that which is for the common good of their family; and much more should they concur in
asking of their heavenly Father the best blessings, those of the upper springs. 3. That parents
must never think that lost which is bestowed upon their children for their real advantage,
but must be free in giving them portions as well as maintenance, especially when they are
dutiful. Caleb had sons (1 Chron. iv. 15), and yet gave thus liberally to his daughter. Those
parents forget themselves and their relation who grudge their children what is convenient
for them when they can conveniently part with it.
The Lot of Judah. (b. c. 1444.)
20 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah according to their families.
  21 And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the coast of Edom
southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,   22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,
  23 And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,   24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,   25 And Hazor,
Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor,   26 Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,
  27 And Hazar-gaddah, and Heshmon, and Beth-palet,   28 And Hazar-shual, and Beer-
149
Chapter XV
sheba, and Bizjoth-jah,   29 Baalah, and Iim, and Azem,   30 And Eltolad, and Chesil, and
Hormah,   31 And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,   32 And Lebaoth, and Shilhim,
and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their villages:   33 And in the
valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,   34 And Zanoah, and En-gannim, Tappuah, and
Enam,   35 Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,   36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim,
and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages:   37 Zenan, and Hadashah,
and Migdal-gad,   38 And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,   39 Lachish, and Bozkath, and
Eglon,   40 And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,   41 And Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and
Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages:   42 Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan,
  43 And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,   44 And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine
cities with their villages:   45 Ekron, with her towns and her villages:   46 From Ekron even
unto the sea, all that lay near Ashdod, with their villages:   47 Ashdod with her towns and
her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto the river of Egypt, and the great sea,
and the border thereof:   48 And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,   49 And
Dannah, and Kirjath-sannah, which is Debir,   50 And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,  
51 And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages:   52 Arab, and
Dumah, and Eshean,   53 And Janum, and Beth-tappuah, and Aphekah,   54 And Humtah,
and Kirjath-arba, which is Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages:   55 Maon, Carmel,
and Ziph, and Juttah,   56 And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,   57 Cain, Gibeah, and
Timnah; ten cities with their villages:   58 Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedor,   59 And Maarath,
and Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages:   60 Kirjath-baal, which is Kirjath-
jearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages:   61 In the wilderness, Beth-arabah, Middin,
and Secacah,   62 And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and En-gedi; six cities with their villages.
  63 As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive
them out: but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.
We have here a list of the several cities that fell within the lot of the tribe of Judah, which
are mentioned by name, that they might know their own, and both keep it and keep to it,
and might neither through cowardice nor sloth lose the possession of what was their own.
I. The cities are here named, and numbered in several classes, which they then could
account for the reason of better than we can now. Here are, 1. Some that are said to be the
uttermost cities towards the coast of Edom, v. 21-32. Here are thirty-eight named, and yet
said to be twenty-nine (v. 32), because nine of these were afterwards transferred to the lot
of Simeon, and are reckoned as belonging to that, as appears by comparing ch. xix. 2, &c.;
therefore those only are counted (though the rest are named) which remained to Judah. 2.
Others that are said to be in the valley (v. 33) are counted to be fourteen, yet fifteen are
named; but it is probable that Gederah and Gederathaim were either two names or two parts
of one and the same city. 3. Then sixteen are named without any head of distinction, v.
37-41, and nine more, v. 42-44. 4. Then the three Philistine-cities, Ekron, Ashdod, and Gaza,
150
Chapter XV
v. 45-47. 5. Cities in the mountains, eleven in all (v. 48-51), nine more (v. 52-54), ten more
(v. 55-57), six more (v. 58, 59), then two (v. 60), and six in the wilderness, a part of the
country not so thick of inhabitants as some others were.
II. Now here, 1. We do not find Bethlehem, which was afterwards the city of David, and
was ennobled by the birth of our Lord Jesus in it. But that city, which at the best was but
little among the thousands of Judah (Mic. v. 2), except that it was thus dignified, was now
so little as not to be accounted one of the cities, but perhaps was one of the villages not
named. Christ came to give honour to the places he was related to, not to receive honour
from them. 2. Jerusalem is said to continue in the hands of the Jebusites (v. 63), for the
children of Judah could not drive them out, through their sluggishness, stupidity, and unbelief.
Had they attempted it with vigour and resolution, we have reason to think God would not
have been wanting to them to give them success; but they could not do it, because they
would not. Jerusalem was afterwards to be the holy city, the royal city, the city of the great
King, the brightest ornament of all the land of Israel. God has designed it should be so. It
may therefore be justly looked upon as a punishment of their neglect to conquer other cities
which God had given them that they were so long kept out of this. 3. Among the cities of
Judah (in all 114) we meet with Libnah, which in Joram's days revolted, and probably set
up for a free independent state (2 Kings viii. 22), and Lachish, where king Amaziah was
slain (1 Kings xiv. 19); it led the dance in idolatry (Mic. i. 13); it was the beginning of sin to
the daughter of Zion. Giloh, Ahithophel's town, is here mentioned, and Tekoa, of which the
prophet Amos was, and near which Jehoshaphat obtained that glorious victory, 2 Chron.
xx. 20, &c., and Maresha, where Asa was a conqueror. Many of the cities of this tribe occur
in the history of David's troubles. Adullam, Ziph, Keilah, Maon, Engedi, Ziklag, here reckoned
in this tribe, were places near which David had most of his haunts; for, though sometimes
Saul drove him out from the inheritance of the Lord, yet he kept as close to it as he could.
The wilderness of Judah he frequented much, and in it John Baptist preached, and there the
kingdom of heaven commenced, Matt. iii. 1. The riches of this country no doubt answered
Jacob's blessing of this tribe, that he should wash his garments in wine, Gen. xlix. 11. And,
in general, Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise, not envy.
151
Chapter XVI
Chapter XVI
J O S H U A
CHAP. XVI.
It is a pity that this and the following chapter should be separated, for both of them give
us the lot of the children of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh, who, next to Judah, were to
have the post of honour, and therefore had the first and best portion in the northern part
of Canaan, as Judah now had in the southern part. In this chapter we have, I. A general ac-
count of the lot of these two tribes together, ver. 1-4. II. The borders of the lot of Ephraim
in particular, ver. 5-10. That of Manasseh following in the next chapter.
The Lot of Joseph. (b. c. 1444.)
1 And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of
Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Beth-
el,   2 And goeth out from Beth-el to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to
Ataroth,   3 And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Beth-horon
the nether, and to Gezer: and the goings out thereof are at the sea.   4 So the children of
Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.
Though Joseph was one of the younger sons of Jacob, yet he was his eldest by his most
just and best beloved wife Rachel, was himself his best beloved son, and had been the greatest
ornament and support of his family, kept it from perishing in a time of famine, and had
been the shepherd and stone of Israel, and therefore his posterity were very much favoured
by the lot. Their portion lay in the very heart of the land of Canaan. It extended from Jordan
in the east (v. 1) to the sea, the Mediterranean Sea, in the west, so that it took up the whole
breadth of Canaan from side to side; and no question the fruitfulness of the soil answered
the blessings both of Jacob and Moses, Gen. xlix. 25, 26, and Deut. xxxiii. 13, &c. The portions
allotted to Ephraim and Manasseh are not so particularly described as those of the other
tribes; we have only the limits and boundaries of them, not the particular cities in them, as
before we had the cities of Judah and afterwards those of the other tribes. For this no reason
can be assigned, unless we may suppose that Joshua being himself of the children of Joseph
they referred it to him alone to distribute among them the several cities that lay within their
lot, and therefore did not bring in the names of their cities to the great council of their
princes who sat upon this affair, by which means it came to pass that they were not inserted
with the rest in the books.
The Inheritance of Joseph's Children. (b. c. 1444.)
5 And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was thus: even
the border of their inheritance on the east side was Ataroth-addar, unto Beth-horon the
upper;   6 And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and
the border went about eastward unto Taanath-shiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;
152
