Chapter XI
for the Lord of hosts, spared neither the idols nor the idolaters. Saul's disobedience, or rather
his partial obedience, to the command of God, for the utter destruction of the Amalekites,
cost him his kingdom. It should seem Joshua himself gives this account of his most careful
and punctual observance of his orders in the execution of his commission, that in all respects
he had done as Moses commanded him; and then it intimates that he had more pleasure
and satisfaction in reflecting upon his obedience to the commands of God in all this war,
and valued himself more upon that, than upon all the gains and triumphs with which he
was enriched and advanced. 2. That all the promises God had given to Moses relating to
this conquest were accomplished on his part, v. 23. Joshua took the whole land, conquered
it, and took possession of it, according to all that the Lord said unto Moses. God had promised
to drive out the nations before them (Exod. xxxiii. 2; xxxiv. 11), and to bring them down,
Deut. ix. 3. And now it was done. There failed not one word of the promise. Our successes
and enjoyments are then doubly sweet and comfortable to us when we see them flowing to
us from the promise (this is according to what the Lord said), as our obedience is then ac-
ceptable to God when it has an eye to the precept. And, if we make conscience of our duty,
we need not question the performance of the promise.
125
Chapter XII
Chapter XII
J O S H U A
CHAP. XII.
This chapter is a summary of Israel's conquests. I. Their conquests under Moses, on the
other side Jordan (for we now suppose ourselves in Canaan) eastward, which we had the
history of, Num. xxi. 24, &c. And here the abridgment of that history, ver. 1-6. II. Their
conquests under Joshua, on this side Jordan, westward. 1. The country they reduced, ver.
7, 8. 2. The kings they subdued, thirty-one in all, ver. 9-24. And this comes in here, not only
as a conclusion of the history of the wars of Canaan (that we might at one view see what
they had got), but as a preface to the history of the dividing of Canaan, that all that might
be put together which they were not to make a distribution of.
Summary of Israel's Conquests. (b. c. 1450.)
1 Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and possessed
their land on the other side Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto
mount Hermon, and all the plain on the east:   2 Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in
Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and from the
middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border
of the children of Ammon;   3 And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and
unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to Beth-jeshimoth; and from
the south, under Ashdoth-pisgah:   4 And the coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the
remnant of the giants, that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,   5 And reigned in mount Her-
mon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurites and the
Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.   6 Them did Moses
the servant of the Lord and the children of Israel smite: and Moses the servant of the Lord
gave it for a possession unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh.
Joshua, or whoever else is the historian before he comes to sum up the new conquests
Israel had made, in these verses receives their former conquests in Moses's time, under
whom they became masters of the great and potent kingdoms of Sihon and Og. Note, Fresh
mercies must not drown the remembrance of former mercies, nor must the glory of the
present instruments of good to the church be suffered to eclipse and diminish the just
honour of those who have gone before them, and who were the blessings and ornaments of
their day. Joshua's services and achievements are confessedly great, but let not those under
Moses be overlooked and forgotten, since God was the same who wrought both, and both
put together proclaim him the Alpha and Omega of Israel's great salvation. Here is, 1. A
description of this conquered country, the measure and bounds of it in general (v. 1): From
the river Arnon in the south, to Mount Hermon in the north. In particular, here is a descrip-
tion of the kingdom of Sihon (v. 2, 3), and that of Og, v. 4, 5. Moses had described this
country very particularly (Deut. ii. 36; iii. 4, &c.), and this description here agrees with his.
126
Chapter XII
King Og is said to dwell at Ashtaroth and Edrei (v. 4), probably because they were both his
royal cities; he had palaces in both, and resided sometimes in one and sometimes in the
other; one perhaps was his summer seat and the other his winter seat. But Israel took both
from him, and made one grave to serve him that could not be content with one palace. 2.
The distribution of this country. Moses assigned it to the two tribes and a half, at their request,
and divided it among them (v. 6), of which we had the story at large, Num. xxxii. The dividing
of it when it was conquered by Moses is here mentioned as an example to Joshua what he
must do now that he had conquered the country on this side Jordan. Moses, in his time,
gave to one part of Israel a very rich and fruitful country, but it was on the outside of Jordan;
but Joshua gave to all Israel the holy land, the mountain of God's sanctuary, within Jordan:
so the law conferred upon some few of God's spiritual Israel external temporal blessings,
which were earnests of good things to come; but our Lord Jesus, the true Joshua, has provided
for all the children of promise spiritual blessings—the privileges of the sanctuary, and the
heavenly Canaan. The triumphs and grants of the law were glorious, but those of the gospel
far exceed in glory.
7 And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the children of Israel smote
on this side Jordan on the west, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount
Halak, that goeth up to Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a possession ac-
cording to their divisions;   8 In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in
the springs, and in the wilderness, and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and
the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites:   9 The king of Jericho, one;
the king of Ai, which is beside Beth-el, one;   10 The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of
Hebron, one;   11 The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;   12 The king of Eglon,
one; the king of Gezer, one;   13 The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;   14 The
king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;   15 The king of Libnah, one; the king of
Adullam, one;   16 The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Beth-el, one;   17 The king of
Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;   18 The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon,
one;   19 The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;   20 The king of Shimron-meron,
one; the king of Achshaph, one;   21 The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;  
22 The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;   23 The king of Dor in
the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one;   24 The king of Tirzah, one: all
the kings thirty and one.
We have here a breviate of Joshua's conquests.
I. The limits of the country he conquered. It lay between Jordan on the east and the
Mediterranean Sea on the west, and extended from Baal-gad near Lebanon in the north to
Halak, which lay upon the country of Edom in the south, v. 7. The boundaries are more
largely described, Num. xxxiv. 2, &c. But what is here said is enough to show that God had
127
Chapter XII
been as good as his word, and had given them possession of all he had promised them by
Moses, if they would but have kept it.
II. The various kinds of land that were found in this country, which contributed both
to its pleasantness and to its fruitfulness, v. 8. There were mountains, not craggy, and rocky,
and barren, which are frightful to the traveller and useless to the inhabitants, but fruitful
hills, such as put forth precious things (Deut. xxxiii. 15), which charmed the spectator's eye
and filled the owner's hand. And valleys, not mossy and boggy, but covered with corn, Ps.
lxv. 13. There were plains, and springs to water them; and even in that rich land there were
wildernesses too, or forests, which were not so thickly inhabited as other parts, yet had towns
and houses in them, but served as foils to set off the more pleasant and fruitful countries.
III. The several nations that had been in possession of this country—Hittites, Amorites,
Canaanites, &c., all of them descended from Canaan, the accursed son of Ham, Gen. x.
15-18. Seven nations they are called (Deut. vii. 1), and so many are there reckoned up, but
here six only are mentioned, the Girgashites being either lost or left out, though we find
them, Gen. x. 16 and xv. 21. Either they were incorporated with some other of these nations,
or, as the tradition of the Jews is, upon the approach of Israel under Joshua they all withdrew
and went into Africa, leaving their country to be possessed by Israel, with whom they saw
it was to no purpose to contend, and therefore they are not named among the nations that
Joshua subdued.
IV. A list of the kings that were conquered and subdued by the sword of Israel, some
in the field, others in their own cities, thirty-one in all, and very particularly named and
counted, it should seem, in the order in which they were conquered; for the catalogue begins
with the kings of Jericho and Ai, then takes in the king of Jerusalem and the princes of the
south that were in confederacy with him, and then proceeds to those of the northern asso-
ciation. Now, 1. This shows what a very fruitful country Canaan then was, which could
support so many kingdoms, and in which so many kings chose to throng together rather
than disperse themselves into other countries, which we may suppose not yet inhabited, but
where, though they might find more room, they could not expect such plenty and pleasure:
this was the land God spied out for Israel; and yet at this day it is one of the most barren,
despicable, and unprofitable countries in the world: such is the effect of the curse it lies under,
since its possessors rejected Christ and his gospel, as was foretold by Moses, Deut. xxix. 23.
2. It shows what narrow limits men's ambition was then confined to. These kings contented
themselves with the government, each of them, of one city and the towns and villages that
pertained to it; and no one of them, for aught that appears, aimed to make himself master
of the rest, but, when there was occasion, all united for the common safety. Yet it should
seem that what was wanting in the extent of their territories was made up in the absoluteness
of their power, their subjects being all their tenants and vassals, and entirely at their com-
mand. 3. It shows how good God was to Israel, in giving them victory over all these kings,
128
Chapter XII
and possession of all these kingdoms, and what obligations he hereby laid upon them to
observe his statutes and to keep his laws, Ps. cv. 44, 45. Here were thirty-one kingdoms, or
seigniories, to be divided among nine tribes and a half of Israel. Of these there fell to the lot
of Judah the kingdoms of Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, Eglon, Debir, Arad, Libnah, and
Adullam, eight in all, besides part of the kingdom of Jerusalem and part of Geder. Benjamin
had the kingdoms of Jericho, Ai, Jerusalem, Makkedah, Beth-el, and the nations of Gilgal,
six in all. Simeon had the kingdom of Hormah and part of Geder. Ephraim had the kingdoms
of Gezer and Tirzah. Manasseh (that half-tribe) had the kingdoms of Tappuah and Hepher,
Taanach and Megiddo. Asher had the kingdoms of Aphek and Achshaph. Zebulun had the
kingdoms of Lasharon, Shimron-meron, and Jokneam. Naphtali had the kingdoms of
Madon, Hazor, and Kedesh. And Issachar had that of Dor. These were some of the great
and famous kings that God smote, for his mercy endureth for ever; and gave their land for a
heritage, even a heritage unto Israel his servant, for his mercy endureth for ever, Ps. cxxxvi.
17, &c.
129
Chapter XIII
Chapter XIII
J O S H U A
CHAP. XIII.
At this chapter begins the account of the dividing of the land of Canaan among the
tribes of Israel by lot, a narrative not so entertaining and instructive as that of the conquest
of it, and yet it is thought fit to be inserted in the sacred history, to illustrate the performance
of the promise made to the fathers, that this land should be given to the seed of Jacob, to
them and not to any other. The preserving of this distribution would be of great use to the
Jewish nation, who were obliged by the law to keep up this first distribution, and not to
transfer inheritances from tribe to tribe, Num. xxxvi. 9. It is likewise of use to us for the ex-
plaining of other scriptures: the learned know how much light the geographical description
of a country gives to the history of it. And therefore we are not to skip over these chapters
of hard names as useless and not to be regarded; where God has a mouth to speak and a
hand to write we should find an ear to hear an eye to read; and God give us a heart to profit!
In this chapter, I. God informs Joshua what parts of the country that were intended in the
grant to Israel yet remained unconquered, and not got in possession, ver. 1-6. II. He appoints
him, notwithstanding, to make a distribution of what was conquered, ver. 7. III. To complete
this account, here is a repetition of the distribution Moses had made of the land on the
other side Jordan; in general (ver. 8-14), in particular, the lot of Reuben (ver. 15-23), of Gad
(ver. 24-28), of the half tribe of Manasseh, ver. 29-33.
The Distribution of Canaan. (b. c. 1445.)
1 Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the Lord said unto him, Thou art old
and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much land to be possessed.   2 This is
the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the Philistines, and all Geshuri,   3 From Sihor,
which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the
Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites,
the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:   4 From the south, all the land of the
Canaanites, and Mearah that is beside the Sidonians, unto Aphek, to the borders of the
Amorites:   5 And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from
Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath.   6 All the inhabitants of the
hill country from Lebanon unto Misrephothmaim, and all the Sidonians, them will I drive
out from before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites for an
inheritance, as I have commanded thee.
Here, I. God puts Joshua in mind of his old age, v. 1. 1. It is said that Joshua was old and
stricken in years, and he and Caleb were at this time the only old men among the thousands
of Israel, none except them of all those who were numbered at Mount Sinai being now alive.
He had been a man of war from his youth (Exod. xvii. 10); but now he yielded to the infirm-
ities of age, with which it is in vain for the stoutest to think of contesting. It should seem
130
Chapter XIII
Joshua had not the same strength and vigour in his old age that Moses had; all that come
to old age do not find it alike good; generally, the days of old age are evil days, and such as
there is no pleasure in, nor expectation of service from. 2. God takes notice of it to him: God
said to him, Thou art old. Note, It is good for those who are old and stricken in years to be
put in remembrance of their being so. Some have gray hairs here and there upon them, and
perceive it not (Hos. vii. 9); they do not care to think of it, and therefore need to be told of
it, that they may be quickened to do the work of life, and make preparation for death, which
is coming towards them apace. But God mentions Joshua's age and growing infirmities, (1.)
As a reason why he should now lay by the thoughts of pursuing the war; he cannot expect
to see an end of it quickly, for there remained much land, more perhaps than he thought,
to be possessed, in several parts remote from each other: and it was not fit that at his age he
should be put upon the fatigue of renewing the war, and carrying it to such distant places;
no, it was enough for him that he had reduced the body of the country. "Let him be gathered
to rest with honour and the thanks of his people for the good services he had done them,
and let the conquering of the skirts of the country be left for those that shall come after." As
he had entered into the labours of Moses, so let others enter into his, and bring forth the
top-stone, the doing of which was reserved for David long after. Observe, God considers
the frame of his people, and would not have them burdened with work above their strength.
It cannot be expected that old people should do as they have done for God and their country.
(2.) As a reason why he should speedily apply himself to the dividing of that which he had
conquered. That work must be done, and done quickly; it was necessary that he should
preside in the doing of it, and therefore, he being old and stricken in years, and not likely to
continue long, let him make this his concluding piece of service to God and Israel. All people,
but especially old people, should set themselves to do that quickly which must be done before
they die, lest death prevent them, Eccl. ix. 10.
II. He gives him a particular account of the land that yet remained unconquered, which
was intended for Israel, and which, in due time, they should be masters of if they did not
put a bar in their own door. Divers places are here mentioned, some in the south, as the
country of the Philistines, governed by five lords, and the land that lay towards Egypt (v. 2,
3), some westward, as that which lay towards the Sidonians (v. 4), some eastward, as all Le-
banon (v. 5), some towards the north, as that in the entering in of Hamath, v. 5. Joshua is
told this, and he made the people acquainted with it, 1. That they might be the more affected
with God's goodness to them in giving them this good land, and might thereby be engaged
to love and serve him; for, if this which they had was too little, God would moreover give
them such and such things, 2 Sam. xii. 8. 2. That they might not be tempted to make any
league, or contract any dangerous familiarity with these their neighbours so as to learn their
way, but might rather be jealous of them, as a people that kept them from their right and
that they had just cause of quarrel with. 3. That they might keep themselves in a posture for
131
